# The Last Basic Data Type: Relations

At the very beginning, we looked at functions and noted that they are mappings that are right-unique: every input gets mapped to exactly one output.
But we can think of many things that feel like a function but do not fit this requirement because there are multiple outputs for a single input.

\begin{example}
The question *Is $x$ a child of $y$* is a function because it maps any two $x$ and $y$ to either true or false, but never both.
But if we slightly change the question to just *Name a child of $y$*, we are no longer dealing with a function because multiple answers are possible if $y$ has more than one child.
\end{example}

This kind of generalized function is called a *relation*.
And at this point it probably won't come as a surprise to you that relations can be defined as a special type of function.

## Defining Relations

Suppose that we have some input $i$ from which one can produce the outputs $o$, $p$, and $q$.
This cannot be a function because it is not a right-unique mapping.
But we could make it right-unique by mapping $i$ directly to $\setof{o, p, q}$ and interpreting this as *every member of this set is a valid output for $i$*.
Whenever a function maps elements of some fixed set $A$ to subsets of some fixed set $B$, we are dealing with a relation.

\begin{definition}
    A *relation* $R$ from set $A$ to set $B$ is a function $f_R: A \rightarrow \wp(B)$.
    We also write $\tuple{R,A,B}$ to indicate the domain $A$ and co-domain $B$ of $R$.
\end{definition}

Alternatively, a relation can be regarded as a set of pairs.
In this case one defines a relation $R$ over domain $A$ and co-domain $B$ as $R \subseteq A \times B$.

Just like sets, multisets, and tuples can be regarded as functions but still come with their own unique notation to simplify discussion, relations have a few convenient shorthands:

- $a R = f_R(a) = \setof{ b \mid \tuple{a,b} \in R}$, and
- $a \mathrel{R} b$ iff $b \in aR$ iff $\tuple{a,b} \in R$.

\begin{example}
Consider the mapping from parts of speech to words.
This is not a function because some (in fact, every) POS can be mapped to more than one word.
But we can regard it as a relatio from the set of POS to the set of English words such that $f_R$ maps every POS to the words that can have this POS.
For example, $f_R(V) \is \setof{ \text{admire}, \text{eat}, \text{assemble}, \ldots }$, whereas $f_R(N) \is \setof{ \text{mathematics}, \text{food}, \text{cat}, \text{inspiration}, \ldots }$.
Equivalently, we can define $R$ as a set of pairs:
$$
\left \{
\begin{matrix}
    \tuple{V, \text{admire}} &
    \tuple{V, \text{eat}} &
    \tuple{V, \text{assemble}} &
    \cdots\\
    \tuple{R, \text{mathematics}} &
    \tuple{R, \text{food}} &
    \tuple{R, \text{cat}} &
    \cdots\\
    \vdots\\
\end{matrix}
\right \}
$$
\end{example}

## Operations on Relations

There are several operations that can be applied to relations to modify them.
All of them are easier to define with the view of relations as sets of tuples.

Arguably the most important operation is inverse, which as in the case of functions flips the direction of the mapping.

\begin{definition}
    Let $R \subseteq A \times B$.
    Then the *inverse of $R$* is defined as $\inv{R} \is \setof{ \tuple{b,a} \mid \tuple{a,b} \in R}$.
\end{definition}

In addition, the set-theoretic operations union, intersection, and (relative) complement can be applied to relations in the standard fashion because relations are just sets of tuples.
