# Trees as Relational Objects

## Trees for Sentence Structure

So far we have treated sentences as strings, as simple sequences of words.
But decades of syntactic research have amassed an enormous body of evidence that this simply isn't the right way of thinking about sentences.
Some words in a sentence are more tightly connected than others, and a string cannot encode this fact.

\begin{example}
The sentence *John saw the man with the telescope* can have two meanings: one where John used a telescope to see the man, and one where the man that John saw had a telescope with him.
In the first case *with the telescope* seems more closely connected to *saw*, in the second to *man*.

Another example comes from the possibility in English to emphasize parts of a sentence by putting them at the beginning, as in the following paradigm:

<ol>
<li>The old man met this girl at a party</li>
<li>It is the old man that met this girl at a party</li>
<li>It is this girl that the old man met at a party</li>
<li>It is at a party that the old man met this girl</li>
<li>It is a party that the old man met this girl at</li>
</ol>

But not everything can go in this spot, even if could be worth emphasizing.

<ol>
<li>It is man (not woman) that the old met this girl at a party</li>
<li>It is old (not young) that the man met this girl at a party</li>
<li>It is old man (not young woman) that the met this girl at a party</li>
<li>It is this (not that) that the old man met girl at a party</li>
<li>It is at (not after) that the old man met this girl a party</li>
<li>It is met (not kiss) that the old man this girl at a party</li>
</ol>

So not all words in a sentence are on the same level, some can do things that other cannot.
And the same argument also shows that not all substrings of a sentence are alike.
\end{example}

Instead of flat strings, trees are more like chemical molecules where words are connected by intricate structures.
Linguists formalize these structures by *trees*, such as the one below.

\input_mid{./tree_psg.forest}

As in all sciences, there isn't perfect agreement about how to analyze the facts, and so you might also find other tree structures being proposed.
Three examples are shown below, some of which are considered obsolete nowadays.

\input_mid{./tree_x'.forest}

\input_mid{./tree_bps.forest}

\input_mid{./tree_dep.forest}

There certainly are many differences between these structures, but the motivation for these differences would be the subject of a syntax class.
We are only concerned with the mathematical status of these structures.
And here things are simple: despite all their differences, all these structures are trees.

A tree consists of a number of nodes that are ordered vertically.
The tree must have a single node at the very top, which is called its *root*.
Each node may have one or more branches that connect it to nodes below it.
Crucially, no node can be connected to more than one node above it.
That's what gives the tree-like appearance.

## Defining Trees as Labeled Gorn Tree Domains

Since trees are a fundamental data structure in linguistics, we will be dealing with them quite a bit at various points.
That's why we need to have a precise terminology to talk about them, and a more abstract understanding for what a tree is (among other things, this is very useful if you ever have to write a program that works with trees rather than strings).
The most common view of trees defines them as a special type of graph.
But we haven't encountered graphs yet, and to be honest, the definition is rather clunky.
Instead, we will take an approach that reveals trees to be a natural generalization of strings.

Recall that each string is a function from an initial subset of $\mathbb{N}$ to some fixed set $\Sigma$.
Here's another way of saying that: each string is a pair $\tuple{D, \ell}$ where $D$ is a *downward-closed* set of natural numbers and $\ell$ is a *labeling function* from $D$ to $\Sigma$.
By downward-closed we mean that for every $y \in D$ and $x < y$, it must be the case that $y \in D$.
So $4 \in D$ implies $3 \in D$, $2 \in D$, $1 \in D$, and $0 \in D$.
This definition of string is fully equivalent with our original one, but it makes it clearer what the work of a string function is:

1. It has to pick out a set of nodes, which can be linearly ordered by $<$ without any gaps.
2. It must give each one of those nodes a label, drawn from $\Sigma$.

Now think about how a tree differs from a string.
We still have a set of nodes, as for strings, and we still have to give every node a label.
The only thing that has become more complicated is the arrangement between the nodes, which is no longer a simple line but can contain forks at any given point.
This is the only complexity that trees add over strings.
In a string, we can look at node $2$ and know immediately that it occurs to the right of $1$ and $0$.
What we would like for trees is a similar system of numbering nodes that immediately allows us to infer which nodes are above the one we picked.

The answer to that are *Gorn addresses*.
This is a simple system that assigns each node in a tree a unique identifier that is not a number, but a string of numbers.

\begin{example}
Let's look once more at the very frist tree we encountered in this unit.

\input_mid{./tree_psg.forest}

If instead of the labels we write down the Gorn addresses of each node, the tree looks as follows.

\input_mid{./tree_psg_gorn.forest}

\end{example}

A Gorn address of node $n$ is the result of concatenating two components:

1. The Gorn address of the node $m$ immediately above $n$.
1. The number of nodes that are to the left of $n$ that also have $m$ immediately above them.

\begin{example}
The root node always has the address $\emptystring$ by convention.
The nodes below the root are $0$ and $1$.
Since the address of the node above them is $\emptystring$, that is their first component.
The first node has no other nodes ot its left, so its second component is 0, and $\emptystring \tuplecat 0 = 0$.
The second node has one node to its left, so we have $\emptystring \tuplecat 1 = 1$.
Below $1$ we find two nodes, whose addresses are $10$ and $11$.
Careful here: those aren't the natural numbers ten and eleven, those are the strings $1 \tuplecat 0 = 10$ and $1 \tuplecat 1 = 11$.
So they should be read "one-zero" and "one-one".
Similarly, $1110$ is not "one thousand one hundred ten", or "one hundred eleven - zero", it is "one-one-one-zero".
\end{example}

Since Gorn addresses follow a very specific pattern, the set of Gorn addresses for any given tree obeys two closure properties:

1. **Prefix closure:** if string $a$ is an address for a node in the tree, then so is every prefix of $a$
1. **Downward closure:** if string $a$ is an address for a node in the tree,
then so is every string that can be obtained from $a$ by replacing the last symbol by a smaller natural number.

\begin{example}
Consider once more our example tree, repeated here for your convenience:

\input_mid{./tree_psg_gorn.forest}

You can pick any arbitrary node, say, $111$.
The prefixes of $111$ are, in decreasing length: $111$, $11$, $1$, and $\emptystring$.
Every one of those addresses is part of the tree --- they're the addresses of the nodes that are higher than $111$.
And we can also take $111$ and replace its last component by the smaller number $0$ to get $110$.
That's the address to the left of $111$.
\end{example}

With Gorn addresses, is it very easy to define trees.

\begin{definition}
A *$\Sigma$-labeled Gorn tree domain* (or simply *$\Sigma$-tree*) is a pair $\tuple{D, \ell}$, where $D \subseteq \mathbb{N}^*$ is the set of nodes in the tree and  $\ell: D \rightarrow \Sigma$ is a (total) labeling function.
We require that $D$ satisfies the following closure properties:

<ol>
<li>**Prefix closure:** If $u \in D$, then $v \in D$ for every $v$ such that $u = v \tuplecat v'$ ($v, v' \in \mathbb{N}^*$).</li>
<li>**Downard closure:** If $u \in D$ and $u = v \tuplecat i$ for some $v \in \mathbb{N}^*$ and $i \in \mathbb{N}$, then $v \tuplecat j \in D$ for every $j < i$.</li>
</ol>
\end{definition}

Note that the definition of $\Sigma$-tree is very similar to the factorized definition of string we used above.
The main difference is the choice of $D$.
For strings, $D$ is a set of natural numbers, whereas for trees $D$ is a set of strings over natural numbers.
In fact, we can view strings just a special case of Gorn tree domains.
Suppose that instead of $0, 1, 2, 3, \ldots$ we write $\emptystring, 0, 00, 000, \ldots$.
So the natural numbers are just a shorthand for indicating the length of a string in $\setof{0}^*$.
Then every string has a domain $D \subseteq \setof{0}^*$ that is both prefix-closed and downward-closed.
In other words, every string satisfies the conditions for being a Gorn tree domain, and thus it is also a tree.


## Tree Relations as Relations over Gorn Domains

Let us look at several relations over trees and try to define them in formal terms.

Our basic relation is *mother-of*, or to use a more gender-agnostic terms, *parent-of*.
Visually, a node $x$ is the mother of $y$ iff $x$ and $y$ are connected by a line and $x$ is higher than $y$.
In the other direction, we say that $y$ is a *daughter* or *child* of $x$.
So the daughter-of relation is the inverse of the mother-of relation.

\begin{example}
Here is the by now familiar example tree:

\input_mid{./tree_psg.forest}

And here is its counterpart with Gorn addresses:

\input_mid{./tree_psg_gorn.forest}

The node at address $10$ labeled VP is the parent of V and NP at address $100$ and $101$, respectively.
This VP node is the daughter of node the node at address $1$, which is also labeled VP.
\end{example}

The "node above you" analogy is not a formal definition of course, it's just a convention for how we draw those trees.
If we were to rotate every tree by 90 degrees in counterclockwise fashion, then the parent would instead be to the left.
In order to make the parent-of relation more precise, we once again view trees as specific sets of Gorn addresses.
As mentioned before, whenever a node $y$ is the daughter of a node $x$, the Gorn address of $y$ is obtained by taking the Gorn address of $x$ and adding a natural number at the end.
In other words, $x$ is the mother of $y$ iff $x$ is the longest proper prefix of $y$.

\begin{definition}
    Let $D$ be a Gorn tree domain.
    Then the *parent-of* relation $P \subset D \times D$ contains $\tuple{x,y}$ iff there exists some $u \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $y = x \tuplecat u$.
    We call $\inv{P}$ the *child-of* relation.
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
In the previous example, we saw that $10$ is the mother of $100$ and $101$.
That fits the definition because $10$ is indeed the longest proper prefix of each one of those strings.
The definition works even for $0$ and $1$, the daughters of the root node:
the root has address $\emptystring$, and $0 = \emptystring \tuplecat 0$ and $1 = \emptystring \tuplecat 1$.
\end{example}

With the parent-of relation, it is also very easy to identify which nodes are parents and which are children.
Note that most nodes are both.
Only the root node is not a child, and only the nodes at the very bottom of a tree are not parents.
These nodes are also called *leaves*.

\begin{definition}
    For any Gorn tree domain $D$, we call
    <ul>
    <li>$D_P \is \setof{ x \mid \text{there is a $y$ s.t.} \tuple{x,y} \in P}$ the set of *parents*,</li>
    <li>$D_C \is \setof{ y \mid \text{there is an $x$ s.t.} \tuple{x,y} \in P}$ the set of *children*,</li>
    <li>$D_L \is D - D_P$ the set of *leaves*</li>
    </ul>
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
In our example tree, the leaves are $000$, $010$, $020$, $1000$, $10100$, $10110$, $1100$, $11100$, and $11110$.

\input_mid{./tree_psg_gorn.forest}
\end{example}

Linguists are often interested in nodes that are closely related.
The parent-of relation is arguably the closest possible relation, but the *sibling* or *sister* relation is also important.
Two nodes are siblings iff they have the same parent.

\begin{definition}
    Given a Gorn tree domain $D$, $S \is \setof{ \tuple{x,y} \mid \text{$x \neq y$ and there exists a $z$ s.t. $\tuple{z,x} \in P$ and $\tuple{z,y} \in P$}}$ is the *sibling* relation.
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
In our example tree, $00$, $01$, and $02$ are all siblings of each other because they share the parent $0$.
\end{example}

Arguably the most important relation, however, is *dominance*.
Dominance can be regarded as the tree analogue of ancenstry: $x$ dominates $y$ iff $x$ is the parent of $y$, or $x$ is the parent of the parent of $y$, or $x$ is the parent of the parent of the parent of $y$, and so on.
Like the parent relation, we can describe this in terms of string prefixes of Gorn addresses.
Whereas $x$ is the parent of $y$ iff it is the **longest** proper prefix of $y$, $x$ dominates $y$ iff it is **some** proper prefix of $y$.

\begin{example}
In our example tree, $0$ properly dominates $00$, $01$, $02$, $000$, $010$, and $020$.
\end{example}

The way the term *dominance* is used in the linguistic literature is actually somewhat sloppy.
Sometimes a node is taken to dominate itself, and sometimes it is not.
That's because there are two distinct notions of dominance, *proper dominance* and *reflexive dominance*, and linguists like to drop the first part of the name because the intended meaning is often clear from context. 
But "often" does not mean "always", unfortunately, and adding insult to injury is that the *parent-of* relation is sometimes called *immediate dominance*.
As you can see, there's a lot of potential for confusion here, so let us make the three terms crystal clear with our formal terminology.

\begin{definition}
Let $D$ be a Gorn domain and $x$ and $y$ nodes of $D$.
Then
<ul>
<li>$x$ immediately dominates $y$ ($x \idom y$) iff $x$ is the parent of $y$,</li>
<li>$x$ properly dominates $y$ ($x \pdom y$) iff $x$ is proper prefix of $y$,</li>
<li>$x$ reflexively dominates $y$ ($x \rdom y$) iff $x$ is a prefix of $y$.</li>
</ul>
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
We already know that $0$ immediately dominates $00$, $01$, $02$, which implies that it properly dominates them.
In addition, it properly dominates $000$, $010$, and $020$.
Reflexive dominance only adds $0$ itself (remember that every string is a prefix of itself).
\end{example}


## Linear Order in Trees

We can also define a linear order between nodes.
As for dominance, we have to distinguish multiple types.
First, we can have a linear order between siblings.
Let us call this the *left-of* relation.
This relation only holds between siblings.

\begin{example}
We return once more to our example tree.

\input_mid{./tree_psg_gorn.forest}

Here $00$ is left-of $01$ and $02$, and $01$ is left-of $02$.
Even though the nodes appear to the left of many other nodes, e.g. $10$ and $11$, they do not stand in the left-of relation to them.
\end{example}

As for strings, we may also use a *successor* relation, which holds between two adjacent siblings.
Intuitively, "successor" is just a shorter name for the inverse of "immediately left-of".

\begin{example}
$00$ is immediately left-of $01$, so $01$ is the successor of $00$.
Similarly, $02$ is the successor of $01$.
Again we are restricted to siblings, so $02$ has no successor.

Note that successor in a tree is not the same as successor in the string.
For instance, *met* is the successor of *man* in *The old man met this girl at a party*.
But in the corresponding tree, *met* is $1000$ whereas *man* is $020$.
These nodes do not stand in a successor relation.
\end{example}

To talk about the linear order of nodes that are not siblings, we use the *precedence* relation.
Intuitively, a node $a$ precedes a node $b$ iff we can go up from $a$, take a right branch, and keep going down until we hit $b$. 

\begin{example}
Even though $02$ is not left-of any node, there are many nodes it precedes.
Going up from $02$, we can reach $0$ --- taking a right branch there would only take us back to $02$, so we instead go up one more step.
Now we are at the root node.
From here we can reach $1$, $10$, $11$, and all nodes below them.
All these nodes are preceded by $02$.

The same procedure shows that $01$ precedes $020$, $02$, and everything that node precedes.
\end{example}

Precedence is the natural tree counterpart to string precedence: if we restrict it to leaf nodes, we obtain the order of words in the sentence that the tree represents.

\begin{definition}
Let $D$ be an arbitrary Gorn tree domain.
Then for all $ui,vj \in D$ with $u,v \in \mathbb{N}^*$ and $i,j \in \mathbb{N}$:

<ul>
<li>$ui$ is *left-of* $vj$ iff $u=v$ and $i < j$,</li>
<li>$ui$ is *immediately left-of* $vj$ iff $u=v$ and $j = i + 1$,</li>
<li>$ui$ is the *successor* of $vj$ iff $vj$ is immediately left-of $ui$,</li>
<li>$ui$ precedes $vj$ ($ui \prec vj$) iff there are $a$ and $b$ such that $a$ reflexively dominates $ui$, $b$ reflexively dominates $vj$, and $a$ is left-of $b$.</li>
</ul>
\end{definition}

Some syntacticians do not like the idea of ordered trees and say that the linear order of words in a sentence is computed in a more indirect fashion from an unordered tree structure.
They support this with the claim that unordered trees are simpler than ordered trees.
After all, the latter has fewer relations than the former.
This supposition is on very shaky grounds.
It is patently false from a computational perspective, where ordered trees are much better behaved than unordered trees.
Ordered trees are also easier to study from a mathematical perspective.
Finally, the definition of Gorn domains shows that there is already an intrinsic ordering in trees due to how the addresses are chosen.
Adding the precedence relation on top of this only makes this fully explicit.

Just to be clear, there is nothing wrong with syntacticians claiming that precedence plays no role in how languages actually work.
That is an empirical issue and may well be true.
But the leap from this empirical claim to the dogma that syntactic trees must not be ordered is not justified.
A data structure can have internal order without that order being exploitable for any meaningful purpose.
For example, suppose that we require that if some tree is well-formed, then so are all the trees we can build from it by switching the order of siblings.
Or if you prefer mathematical jargon, we require the set of well-formed trees to be closed under sibling permutation.
Then linear order of trees is useless:
Suppose that tree $t$ is ill-formed because it violates some precedence requirement $P$.
Then some permutation $u$ of $t$ must satisfy $P$, which means that $u$ is well-formed.
But by assumption this implies that every permutation of $u$ is also well-formed, including our original $t$.
This contradicts the initial claim that $t$ is ill-formed, which shows that there can be no such precedence requirement $P$.

So if you allow all possible orders, you can still have ordered trees without being able to discriminate between trees based on their precedence relations.
This makes it possible for linguists to have their cake and eat it too: we get a computationally and mathematically better behaved data structure without running into the question why precedence does not seem to matter much in syntax (according to at least some syntacticians, that is).


## C-Command

C-command has been the most important relation in syntax for many decades.
It's importance has decreased somewhat in recent years, but it is still noteworthy for being a genuinely linguistic notion.
Whereas the relations we discussed so far are also useful in computer science, c-command is a purely linguistic notion.
Intuitively, a node c-commands everything its sisters reflexively dominate.
If a node has no sisters, than it c-commands whatever its mother c-commands.

\begin{example}
You know the deal, let's look at the example tree for the gazillionth time:

\input_mid{./tree_psg_gorn.forest}

Here $01$ c-commands everything its siblings $00$ and $02$ reflexively dominate.
That's $00$, $000$, $02$, and $020$.
The node $010$ has no siblings, so it c-commands whatever its parent c-commands.
The parent of $010$ is $01$, for which we have already computed th c-commandees.
\end{example}

Many definitions of c-command can be found in the literature, and unfortunately many of them are stated in a sloppy manner.
Here is a common version: *X c-commands Y iff X does not dominate Y and the first branching node dominating X dominates Y*.
Can you find all the things that are wrong with this definition?
Think about it for a minute before you read on.

Alright, here's the problems:

1. What kind of dominance are we talking about?
   Proper dominance, reflexive dominance, or possibly even immediate dominance?
   The answer is: sometimes proper dominance, sometimes reflexive dominance.

1. What is "the first branching node dominating X"?
   The lowest branching node or the highest branching node?
   Or something completely different?

1. What are X and Y?
   Presumably nodes, but we can only infer that because dominance is only defined for nodes, not parts of trees or sets of nodes.

A more exact version of the definition above reads as follows: *X c-commands Y iff X does not reflexively dominate Y and the lowest branching node properly dominating X also properly dominates Y.*
This is still not perfect because we the meaning of lowest has to be intuited, but it's good enough to be workable.

In the special case where a tree contains no unary branching nodes, i.e. nodes that have only one child, c-command can be stated in a simpler fashion as the *composition* of the sibling relation $S$ with reflexive dominance: $C \is \Rcomp{S}{\rdom}$.
This just means that if we can reach $z$ from $x$ by first moving from $x$ to $y$ with the sibling relation and then from $y$ to $z$ via reflexive dominance, then $x$ c-commands $z$.

\begin{definition}
The *composition* of two relations $R$ and $S$ is $\Rcomp{R}{S} \is \setof{ \tuple{x,z} \mid \text{there is a $y$ s.t.} \tuple{x,y} \in R \text{ and } \tuple{y,z} \in S}$.
\end{definition}

\begin{definition}
Given a Gorn tree domain $D$ and $x, y \in D$, $x$ *c-commands* $y$ iff $\tuple{x,y} \in \Rcomp{R}{S}$.
\end{definition}

If we want to extend this definition to trees with unary branches, the sibling relation has to be replaced by a relation that instead chooses the siblings of an appropriate node at a structurally higher position.
