## Functions

1.  For each one of the following, say whether it is a function.
    1. addition
    1. a set
    1. "has parent" (as in has-parent(John) = true/false)
    1. mapping from parents to children
    1. a URL
    1. mapping from utterances (as sequences of sounds) to their meanings
    1. [pig latin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pig_latin)
    1. the function $f$ such that $f(x) = x$ if it is Tuesday and $-x$ otherwise

1.  Give full definitions (including domain and co-domain) of the following functions:
    1. addition over natural numbers (0, 1, 2, ...)
    1. subtraction over natural numbers
    1. the mapping from Scandinavian woman names to IKEA desks and chairs with the same name

1.  Which of the following functions are onto? Explain why.
    1. addition over natural numbers (0, 1, 2, ...)
    1. multiplication over $\setof{ n \in \mathbb{N} \mid n \geq 2}$
    1. the mapping from SSN numbers to US tax payers

1.  For each one of the following functions, say whether it is total or partial.
    1. addition over natural numbers
    1. division over natural numbers
    1. relative complement over $\wp(A)$ for an arbitrary set $A$
    1. the mapping from SSN numbers to living US tax payers

1.  For each one of the following functions, what is its range?
    Is the function onto?
    1. $f: \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$,
       $\tuple{x,y} \mapsto x-y$
    1. $g: \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$,
       $\tuple{x,y} \mapsto x$
    1. $h: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N}$,
       $x \mapsto \tuple{x,x}$
    1. $j: \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N}$,
       $i(\tuple{x,y}) \mapsto g(f(\tuple{x,y}))$
    1. $j: \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N} \times \mathbb{N}$,
       $i(\tuple{x,y}) \mapsto g(h(f(\tuple{x,y})))$


## Sets

1.  Represent the following characteristic functions as sets
    1. $\text{John} \mapsto \top$,
       $\text{Mary} \mapsto \top$,
       $\text{Bill} \mapsto \bot$.
    1. $x^2 \mapsto \top$ for all $x \in \mathbb{N}$
    1. $x \mapsto \bot$ for all $x$
    1. $S \mapsto \top$ for all $S \subseteq \mathbb{N}$ such that $\card{S} \geq 1$

1.  Represent the following sets as their characteristic functions.
    Specify domain and co-domain as you deem appropriate (there are usually infinitely many choices).
    1. $\setof{\text{John}, \text{likes}, \text{Mary}}$
    1. $\setof{\setof{\emptyset}}$
    1. $\setof{a,b,c} \cup \setof{b,c,d}$

1.  For each gap below, fill in $\in$ or $\notin$.
    1. $a \_ \setof{a,b,c}$
    1. $a \_ \setof{a,b,c} \cup (\setof{a,d,e} - \setof{a,f,g})$
    1. $a \_ (\setof{a,b,c} \cup \setof{a,d,e}) - \setof{a,f,g}$
    1. $\wp(\setof{a}) \_ \wp(\setof{a,b,c})$
    1. $\wp(\setof{a}) \_ \wp(\wp(\setof{a,b,c}))$
    1. $\emptyset \_ \setof{\emptyset}$
    1. $\emptyset \_ \wp(\setof{a,b,c})$
    1. $\emptyset \_ \wp(\wp(\emptyset)) \cap \setof{\emptyset}$

1.  Define the following sets as succinctly as possible. 
    You may use all the tools for defining sets that have been covered so far.
    If no shorter version exists, say so.
    1. $\setof{a,b,c} - (\setof{b,c} - \setof{a,b,c})$
    1. $\wp(\setof{a,b,c}) - \wp(\setof{a,b})$
    1. $\wp(\setof{a,b,c} - \setof{a,b})$
    1. $\setof{ n \mid n \in \mathbb{N}} \cup \setof{ -n \mid n \in \mathbb{N}}$
    1. $\setof{\emptyset, \setof{a}}$


## Tuples

1.  Suppose that we would like to extend the notions of union, intersection, and complement to tuples.
    What problems would we run into?
    Can they be fixed?

1.  Compute the value of the following formula:
    $$
    \pi_3(\tuple{\text{Mary}} \tuplecat \pi_2(\tuple{\text{John}, \text{likes}, \text{Mary}}) \tuplecat \pi_1(\emptytuple \tuplecat \tuple{\text{Mary}, \text{slept}}))
    $$

1.  Which of the following tuples are not in $\setof{a,b}^2 \times \wp(\setof{0,1})$?
    1. $\tuple{a,a,\setof{0}}$
    1. $\tuple{a,a,\setof{0,0}}$
    1. $\tuple{\emptyset, a, \emptyset}$
    1. $\tuple{b,a, \emptyset}$
    1. $\tuple{c, \setof{0,1}}$

1.  Is the empty tuple the same object as the empty set? Justify your answer!


## Bag of Words and Local Grammars

1.  According to a bag of words unigram model that ignores stop words, what is the meaning of the following text: 
    *John is a huge jerk. Only John could like John.*

1.  According to a bag of words 4-gram model that ignores stop words, what is the meaning of the following text:
    *If police police police police police, then police police police police police.*

1.  List five strings over $\setof{a,b,c,d}$ that are permitted by the SL-$2$ grammar $\setof{ \String{aa}, \String{bb}, \String{ca}, \String{cb}, \String{\LeftEdge \RightEdge}}$.

1.  Which of the following strings are licensed by the SL-$3$ grammar
    $\setof{ \String{\LeftEdge a b}, \String{a b b}, \String{b a b}, \String{\LeftEdge \LeftEdge \RightEdge}}$?
    1. $\String{a}$
    1. $\String{aababbab}$
    1. $\String{aababcbacb}$
    1. $\emptystring$
    1. $\String{c}$

1.  Which of the following strings are licensed by the TSL-$3$ grammar
    $\tuple{\setof{ \String{\LeftEdge a b}, \String{a b b}, \String{b a b} \String{\LeftEdge \LeftEdge \RightEdge}}, \setof{a, b}}$?
    1. $\String{a}$
    1. $\String{aababbab}$
    1. $\String{aababcbacb}$
    1. $\emptystring$
    1. $\String{c}$

## Multisets

1.  For each one of the following, say whether it is best modeled as a set, a multiset, or a tuple.
    Justify your answer (there's many possible answers, the point is that you should be able to defend yours).
    1. the group of students in the room
    1. a record of when each students entered the classroom
    1. a record of how many seconds after the beginning of the class each student showed up
    1. an address book with names and phone numbers (and nothing else)
    1. a quantitative record of publications in the department, sorted by journal
    1. the collection of mappings from some fixed $\Sigma$ to $\mathbb{N}$
    1. a ranking of faculty members by publication output

1.  Consider the function $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ such that $n \mapsto n - 1$ if $n$ is odd and $n \mapsto n$ otherwise.
    Describe $\setof{ f(n) \mid n \in \mathbb{N}}_M$ with the $\text{item}: \text{count}$ notation.

1.  For each one of the following, fill the gap with $=$ or $\neq$.
    1. $\setof{a,b} \_ \setof{b,b,b,b,b,b,b,b,a}$
    1. $\setof{a,b}_M \_ \setof{b,b,b,b,b,b,b,b,a}_M$
    1. $\setof{a,b} \_ \setof{a,b}_M$
    1. $\tuple{a,a,b} \_ \tuple{a,b,a}$
    1. $\setof{a,a,b}_M \_ \setof{a,b,a}_M$

1.  Compute the result of the following formulas:
    1. $\setof{a:3, b:3, c:3, d:3}_M - (\setof{a:2, b:1, c:3}_M \cap \setof{a:1, b:2, d:3}_M)$
    1. $\setof{a:3, b:3, c:3, d:3}_M - (\setof{a:2, b:1, c:3}_M \cup \setof{a:1, b:2, d:3}_M)$
    1. $\setof{a:3, b:3, c:3, d:3}_M - (\setof{a:2, b:1, c:3}_M \multisum \setof{a:1, b:2, d:3}_M)$
    1. $\card{\wp(2 \multimult \setof{a:1, b:2}_M)}$

## Bag of Words with Multisets

1.  According to a bag of words unigram model that ignores stop words, what is the meaning of the following text: 
    *John is a huge jerk. Only John could like John.*

1.  According to a bag of words 4-gram model that ignores stop words, what is the meaning of the following text:
    *If police police police police police, then police police police police police.*

1.  Redo the calculations from the previous two exercises with frequencies instead of counts.

1.  List all the $2$-skip trigrams of *If police police police police police, then police police police police police*.

1.  Let $G$ be a probabilistic SL-$2$ grammar $\tuple{S, P}$ with the bigrams given below.
    What are the scores for all 9 possible combinations of *John/Mary/the company quickly destroyed himself/herself/itself*?
    What do you make of this?
$$
\begin{array}{rl}
    \{  &\\
        & \LeftEdge \text{Bill}: .25\\
        & \LeftEdge \text{John}: .25\\
        & \LeftEdge \text{Mary}: .25\\
        & \LeftEdge \text{the}: .25\\
        & \text{the company}: 1\\
        & \text{company destroyed}: .7\\
        & \text{company quickly}: .3\\
        & \text{Bill destroyed}: .7\\
        & \text{Bill quickly}: .3\\
        & \text{John destroyed}: .7\\
        & \text{John quickly}: .3\\
        & \text{Mary destroyed}: .7\\
        & \text{Mary quickly}: .3\\
        & \text{quickly destroyed}: 1\\
        & \text{destroyed himself}: .5\\
        & \text{destroyed herself}: .25\\
        & \text{destroyed itself}: .25\\
        & \text{himself}\RightEdge: 1\\
        & \text{herself}\RightEdge: 1\\
        & \text{itself}\RightEdge: 1\\
    \}  &\\
\end{array}
$$
