# Relational Structures as Graphs

At this point we have encountered numerous examples of structures that are defined as a set with one or more relations defined over them:

- strings,
- trees,
- the adjunct extension semilattice,
- the proposition lattice $\tuple{P, \Rightarrow}$,
- the lattice of SL-$n$/SP-$n$ grammars $\tuple{\wp(\Sigma^n), \subseteq}$,
- the Boolean lattice $\mathbf{2} \is \tuple{\setof{0,1}, \leq}$.

While these are all very different structures, they are also very special kinds of structures.
Strings and trees have a specific shape, as do semilattices and lattices, or posets in generals.
But there are many relations that do not yield such specific structures.
For example, what happens if we take $\setof{0,2,\ldots,11}$ and order it by the relation $\equiv_{\mathrm{mod} 3}$ such that $a \equiv_{\mathrm{mod} 3} b$ iff $a \mathrm{mod} 3 = b \mathrm{mod} 3$ --- that is to say, iff $a$ and $b$ have the same remainder when divided by $3$.
This structure can be depicted as below:

\input_big{modulo3_directed.tikz}

So the structure falls into three distinct components, and within each component every node is connected to every node.
This clearly does not fit the requirements of a poset or a (semi)lattice, nor is it a tree or even a string.
But it fits into the class that encompasses all structures that are described in terms of a set and a relation over it: the class of *graphs*.

## Defining (Directed) Graphs

A graph consists of at least two components. 
The first is the set of nodes.
When talking about graphs, every node is usually called a *vertex*, so instead of the graph's set of nodes we talk about the graph's set $V$ of vertices.
In addition, there is an edge relation $E \subseteq V \times V$ that connects vertices to each other.
When drawing graphs, the elements of $E$ are represented by arrows.

\begin{example}
The graph depicted above has $\setof{0,1,2,\ldots,11}$ as its set of vertices, and $E$ consists of the following tuples:

<ol>
<li>$\tuple{0,3}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{0,6}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{0,9}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{3,0}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{3,6}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{3,9}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{6,0}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{6,3}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{6,9}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{9,0}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{9,3}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{9,6}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{1,4}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{1,7}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{1,10}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{4,1}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{4,7}$</li>
<li>$\tuple{4,10}$</li>
<li>and so on</li>
</ol>
\end{example}

By default, we take the edges of a graph to be *directed*: $a E b$ does not imply $b E a$.
This is why we depicted edges with arrows. 
In the special case where $E$ is symmetric, we call the graph *undirected*.
It is customary to draw undirected graphs with undirected edges rather than separate arrows in both directions.
Since the edge relation in our example graph is symmetric, we can draw it in a much simpler fashion using undirected edges.

\input_big{modulo3_undirected.tikz}

If the edge relation is transitive, it is also customary not to draw any edges that can be inferred by transitivity.
This convention further simplifies how we depict our example graph.

\input_big{modulo3_undirected_notransitive.tikz}

But keep in mind that these three pictures all define the same graph, we are merely using various notational conventions to remove clutter from our pictures.
Mathematically, how we draw graphs has nothing to do with their definition.

\begin{definition}
A *graph* is a pair $\tuple{V, E}$ where $V$ is a set of *vertices* and $E \subseteq V \times V$ is the *edge* relation.
\end{definition}

Note that the definition above treats undirected graphs as the special case of directed graphs where $E$ is symmetric.
Some authors instead assume that graphs are undirected by default and use the term *digraph* to refer to a directed graph.
Either one is fine, of course, but for linguistics directed graphs are usually more important than undirected ones, which is why we will continue to treat the latter as a special case of the former.

## Paths and Reachability

One of the central notions for graphs is *reachability*.
A vertex $a$ is reachable from vertex $b$ iff we can follow a sequence of arrows from $a$ to $b$.
This sequence is called a *path*.

\begin{example}
Consider one more the following graph, and assume that the edge relation contains a pair $\tuple{a,b}$ iff there is a line from $a$ to $b$ in the picture:

\input_big{modulo3_undirected_notransitive.tikz}

Here $3$ is reachable from $0$ because there is an edge taking us from $0$ to $3$.
But $6$ is also reachable from $0$ as we can first move to $3$ and from there $6$.
The path from $0$ to $6$ can be written as $\tuple{0,3,6}$.

On the other hand, $1$ is not reachable from $0$.
No matter which sequence of edges we take from $1$, there is no way to ever get to $0$.
\end{example}

\begin{definition}
A *path* through a graph $\tuple{V, E}$ is a sequence $\tuple{v_1, \ldots, v_n}$ ($n \geq 2$) such that $\tuple{v_i, v_{i+1}} \in E$ for all $1 \leq i < n$.
For all $a, b \in V$, we say that $b$ is reachable from $a$ iff there is a path $\tuple{v_1, \ldots, v_n}$ with $v_1 = a$ and $v_n = b$.
\end{definition}

As always in mathematics, there are multiple ways of saying the same thing, and the same is true for reachability.
A node $b$ is reachable from $a$ in graph $\tuple{V, E}$ iff $\tuple{a,b}$ is member of the *transitive closure* of the edge relation.
The transitive closure of an edge relation is obtained by adding an edge between any two nodes $a$ and $b$ with a path from $a$ to $b$.
Or equivalently, the transitive closure of $E$ is the smallest $E'$ with $E \subseteq E' \subseteq V \times V$ such that $E'$ is transitive.
Quite generally, the closure of a relation with respect to property $P$ is the smallest superset of the relation that satisfies $P$.

\begin{example}
Consider the graph below.

\input_small{modulo3_directed_weak.tikz}

Its edge relation $E$ consists of the pairs $\tuple{0,3}$, $\tuple{0,9}$, $\tuple{3,6}$.
The transitive closure $E'$ of $E$ also contains $\tuple{0,6}$.
This is the smallest superset of $E$ that is transitive.
The transitive closure of $E'$ is $E'$ itself --- since $E'$ is already transitive, nothing needs to be added.
The symmetric closure $E''$ of $E'$ must also contain $\tuple{3,0}$, $\tuple{9,0}$, and $\tuple{6,3}$.
Now if we take the transitive closure of $E''$, every node is connected to every node, so the edge relation is identical to $V \times V$.
Thus the transitive, symmetric closure of $E$ is $V \times V$ because there is no smaller extension of $E$ that is both symmetric and transitive.
\end{example}


## Labeled Graphs

The way we defined graphs, all nodes must be distinct because $V$ is a set of vertices, not a multiset.
But then we run into a problem with the structure below. 

\input_big{stringforest.tikz}

We might interpret this as a compact representation of the set of strings $\setof{\String{batter}, \String{bitter}, \String{butter}}$.
But according to our current definition, this is not a graph.
Its set of vertices is $\setof{b, a, i, u, t, t, e, r}$, which is the same as $\setof{b, a, i, u, t, e, r}$, with only one instance of $t$.
So if it were actually a graph, the structure above should look like this according to our definition:

\input_big{stringforest_loop.tikz}

However, this graph does not just encode *batter*, *bitter*, and *butter*, but also *battter*, *buttttter*, *bitttttttttter*, and infinitely many other strings.

We solve this issue by introducing the same kind of distinction between vertices and their label that we already know from strings and trees.
So the original structure is actually a graph with vertices $V \is \setof{0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7}$, combined with a labeling function $\ell: V \rightarrow \setof{a,b,e,i,r,t,u}$ such that

- $\ell(0) = b$,
- $\ell(1) = a$,
- $\ell(2) = i$,
- $\ell(3) = u$,
- $\ell(4) = t$,
- $\ell(5) = t$,
- $\ell(6) = t$,
- $\ell(7) = e$,
- $\ell(8) = r$.

\input_big{stringforest_unlabeled.tikz}

\begin{definition}
A *$\Sigma$-labeled graph* is a triple $\tuple{V,E,\ell}$ such that $\tuple{V, E}$ is a graph and the labeling function $\ell: V \rightarrow \Sigma$ is total.
\end{definition}


## Strings and Trees as Graphs

Both strings and trees can be regarded as special types of graphs.

A string is a labeled finite graph where $E$ is a total order.
Remember that this means that $E$ is transitive, reflexive, antisymmetry, and total.
By totality, there must be an edge between any two nodes $a$ and $b$, which precludes strings from containing nodes that are unordered with respect to each other.
We also cannot have a cycle such that $a E b$ and $b E a$ for distinct $a$ and $b$ because antisymmetry requires $a = b$ in this case.
By transitivity, antisymmetry also blocks cycles of the form $a E b$, $b E c$, and $c E a$.
The only way to totally order all nodes without any cycles is a line, and that's exactly what a string is.

For trees, things are slightly more complicated.
Let us only consider unordered trees at first, i.e. trees where nodes are ordered by (reflexive) dominance but not by precedence.
Reflexive dominance is a weak partial order, but in addition it must also hold that every node has at most one mother: $a E c$ and $b E c$ implies $a E b$ or $b E a$.
But this is still not enough, the graph must also satisfy the property of being * weakly connected*.

\begin{definition}
A undirected graph is *connected* iff the reflexive, transitive closure of its edge relation is total.
Otherwise it is *disconnected*.

A directed graph is
<ul>
<li>*weakly connected* iff the reflexive, symmetric, transitive closure of its edge relation is total,</li>
<li>*connected* iff the reflexive, transitive closure of its edge relation is total,</li>
<li>*strongly connected* iff the reflexive, transitive closure of its edge relation is identical to $V \times V$,</li>
<li>*disconnected* iff it is not weakly connected.</li>
</ul>
\end{definition}

Connectedness measures the degree to which every node in the graph is reachable from some other graph.
A disconnected graph is one where there are nodes $a$ and $b$ such that even if one ignores the direction of the edge relation, one cannot get from $a$ to $b$.
So if we were to construct the graph in the real world as a kind of mobile, we would not be able to hang the graph on the wall with a single hook because not all parts hang together --- at least one part would fall to the ground.

\begin{example}
The undirected graph we saw at the beginning of the unit is disconnected, and the same goes for any directed version of it.
For example, there is no edge between $1$ and $3$, one simply cannot be reached from the other.

\input_big{modulo3_undirected_notransitive.tikz}

However, we can identify parts of the graph that are connected.

\input_small{modulo3_undirected_component.tikz}

Even though there is no edge between $0$ and $6$, the transitive closure of the edge relation does connect the two.

Now let us look at a directed graph, where multiple degrees of connectedness need to be distinguished.

\input_small{modulo3_directed_strong.tikz}

The directed graph above is strongly connected.
When we take the reflexive, transitive closure of the edge relation, every node is reachable from every node.
This is exactly what it means to be strongly connected.

But a slight change in the edge relation suffices to reduce strong connectedness to connectedness.

\input_small{modulo3_directed_connected.tikz}

Even if we look at the reflexive, transitive closure of the edge relation, there is no path from $3$ to $0$, from $6$ to $0$, or from $9$ to $0$.
So we can no longer reach every node from every node.
But for any two nodes $a$ and $b$, it still holds that $a$ can be reached from $b$ or $b$ can be reached from $a$.
Hence the reflexive, transitive closure of the edge relation is still total, and we have a connected graph.

Finally, consider what happens if we remove one edge from the graph above.

\input_small{modulo3_directed_weak.tikz}

Now even the reflexive, transitive closure of the edge relation does not connect $6$ and $9$, so the graph cannot be connected.
However, $6$ and $9$ are still reachable from each other if we consider the reflexive, symmetric, transitive closure of the edge relation.
Therefore, the graph is weakly connected.
\end{example}

Intuitively, the three degrees of connectivity can be described in terms of how we have to move along the arrows in a graph to read one node from another one:

- If we can reach every node from every node by following a sequence of arrows, the graph is strongly connected.
- If we can reach $a$ from $b$ by following a sequence of arrows, but not necessarily $b$ from $a$, the graph is connected.
- If we have to sometimes go against the direction of the arrow to get from $a$ to $b$, the graph is weakly connected.

In trees, one often has to go upwards to reach a given node, against the direction of the reflexive dominance relation.
But once one is allowed to move both along the reflexive dominance relation and against it, every node can be reached from every node.
This shows that trees are weakly connected graphs.

To summarize, then, a graph is a tree iff

1. it is weakly connected, and
1. its edge relation is a weak partial order, and
1. for all vertices $a$, $b$, $c$, it holds that $a \rdom c$ and $b \rdom c$ imply $a \rdom b$ or $b \rdom a$.
