# Modelling the Person Case Constraint with Graphs

Languages do a lot of quirky things, and one particularly quirky thing is the *Person Case Constraint*, short PCC.
The PCC is a restriction on pronouns: if two pronouns are selected by the same verb, the pronouns cannot have certain person combinations.
An example of the PCC can be seen in certain dialects of French.
The sentence *Roger me leur a présenté* 'Roger has shown me to them' is ungrammatical.
But the minimally different *Roger le leur a présenté* 'Rogers has shown him to them' is perfectly fine.
In these dialects, it is alright to combine

- a **third** person direct object pronoun with a **third** person indirect object pronoun,

but not

- a **first** person direct object pronoun with a **first* person indirect object pronoun.

A variety of PCCs have been found across languages --- it almost seems as if new PCCs are discovered every year.
Four PCCs are robustly attested at this point.
Using 1/2/3 as shorthands for first/second/third person and DO/IO as abbreviations for direct and indirect object, they are usually defined as follows:

1. **S(trong)-PCC:** DO must be 3.
1. **U(ltrastrong)-PCC:** DO is less prominent than IO, where 3 is less prominent than 2, and 2 is less prominent than 1.
1. **W(eak)-PCC:** 3IO combines only with 3DO.
1. **M(e first)-PCC** If IO is 2 or 3, then DO is not 1.

That is, to be frank, a mess.
The attested PCCs look like a random collection of conditions, if there is anything principled going on it must be well-hidden.
Or maybe not.
The four PCCs above actually look much more intuitive once we describe them with graphs.

## PCC Graphs

### A Graph for the U-PCC

First a disclaimer: for the rest of the unit we will ignore cases where both DO and IO have the same person.
That is because these configurations often display special behavior that obscures the PCC effects.
By putting aside those cases, we can be sure that the behavior we are describing is part of a PCC rather than some unrelated process.

With that out of the way, consider once more the four PCCs listed above.
The U-PCC differentiates itself from the other PCCs because it is stated in terms of a hierarchy: 3 is less prominent than 2, and 2 is less prominent than 1.
Let us write $x < y$ for *$x$ is less prominent than $y$*.
Then the hierarchy is $3 < 2 < 1$.
The U-PCC requires that the value of DO is less than that of IO: $\text{DO} < \text{IO}$.
Since we ignore cases where both DO and IO have the same value, the U-PCC can also be viewed as the requirement that the value of IO is not less than that of DO: $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$.

Now let us depict this person hierarchy as a graph and interpret $<$ as inverse reachability.
That is to say, $x < y$ iff $x$ is reachable from $y$ (as a mnemonic, you can think of $<$ as the tip of an arrow from $y$ to $x$).

\input_med{./pcc_upcc.tikz}

No matter whether we pick $\text{DO} < \text{IO}$ or $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$, the same combinations are forbidden:

$\downarrow$IO/DO$\rightarrow$ | 1 | 2 | 3
--: | :-: | :-: | :-:
1   | -   | Y   | Y
2   | N   | -   | Y
3   | N   | N   | -

\begin{example}
Consider the second field in the first row.
This field represents a combination of a first person IO with a second person DO.
Since $2 < 1$, DO is less than IO, wherefore both $\text{DO} < \text{IO}$ and $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$ are satisfied.
So we can indeed put a Y(es) in this field to indicate that the combination is well-formed.

On the other hand, the first field in the second row combines a second person IO with a first person DO.
Now neither $\text{DO} < \text{IO}$ nor $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$ are satisfied, and the combination is ill-formed.
\end{example}

This graph-theoretic perspective is not limited to the U-PCC.
By keeping the constraint fixed to $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$ while varying the structure of the graph, we can actually express each one of the four PCCs in a graph-theoretic manner.

### Graphs for S-PCC, W-PCC, and M-PCC

Let us start with the S-PCC, the definition of which is repeated here for your convenience:

1. **S(trong)-PCC:** DO must be 3.

When viewed as a table, the S-PCC only differs from the U-PCC in that the combination of IO1 and DO2 is forbidden (so in a sense the strong PCC is stronger than the ultrastrong PCC --- don't ask me why they are named the way they are).

$\downarrow$IO/DO$\rightarrow$ | 1 | 2 | 3
--: | :-: | :-: | :-:
1   | -   | N   | Y
2   | N   | -   | Y
3   | N   | N   | -

Recall that we equate $<$ with reachability in a graph such that $x < y$ iff $x$ is reachable from $y$.
And if we assume that there is a fixed constraint $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$, then the fact that this combination is illicit tells us that $1 < 2$.
Consequently, $1$ must be reachable from $2$.
Since this is the only difference between the U-PCC and the S-PCC, all we have to do is take the U-PCC graph and change is so that $1$ can be reached from $2$ but not from $3$.

\input_med{./pcc_spcc.tikz}

Simple, isn't it?

The W-PCC is almost the symmetric opposite of the S-PCC with respect to the U-PCC.
Whereas the S-PCC forbids the well-formed combination of $1$ and $2$ in the U-PCC, the W-PCC allows the ill-formed combination of $1$ and $2$ in the U-PCC.

1. **W(eak)-PCC:** 3IO combines only with 3DO.

$\downarrow$IO/DO$\rightarrow$ | 1 | 2 | 3
--: | :-: | :-: | :-:
1   | -   | Y   | Y
2   | Y   | -   | Y
3   | N   | N   | -

If both 1IO+2DO and 2IO+1DO are well-formed, then shouldn't it be the case that we have both $2 < 1$ and $1 < 2$?
But this can't be the case, because that's exactly what we find with the S-PCC, which is distinct from the W-PCC.
If we take the basic constraint to be $\text{DO} < \text{IO}$, then we are truly stuck at this point.
However, with $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$, there is an option: neither $2 < 1$ nor $1 < 2$ holds.
The two are simply unordered with respect to each other, and neither can be reached from the other.
The W-PCC thus can be associated with the graph below.

\input_med{./pcc_wpcc.tikz}

This only leaves the M-PCC.

1. **M(e first)-PCC** If IO is 2 or 3, then DO is not 1.

Since we ignore cases where both IO and DO have the same person, the M-PCC reduces to a ban against IO1, a more permissive version of the S-PCC's canonical ban against IO1 and IO2.

$\downarrow$IO/DO$\rightarrow$ | 1 | 2 | 3
--: | :-: | :-: | :-:
1   | -   | Y   | Y
2   | N   | -   | Y
3   | N   | Y   | -

In order to derive this pattern in conjunction with the principle $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$, both $2 < 1$ and $3 < 1$ must hold, but $2$ and $3$ are unordered with respect to each other.

\input_med{./pcc_mpcc.tikz}

### Interim Summary

At this point we have given a more unified description of the four types of PCC.
Rather than relying on completely different definitions that seem to have little to do with each other, we have identified a general constraint $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$, with the four PCC variants arising from minor differences in how first, second, and third person are ordered with respect to each other.
These orderings are in turn conveniently depicted via graphs.

- U-PCC
\input{./pcc_upcc.tikz}

- S-PCC
\input{./pcc_spcc.tikz}

- W-PCC
\input{./pcc_wpcc.tikz}

- M-PCC
\input{./pcc_mpcc.tikz}


## A Graph-Theoretic Characterization

So far our goal has just been to provide a more intuitive description of the four main PCC-types.
But we can do much more than that.
With graph theory, we can try to explain what makes a PCC a PCC.
If you consider our tabular format, there are 6 cells that can be filled with one of 2 values (Y or N).
Hence there could $2^6 = 64$ distinct PCCs, yet we only find a fraction of that.
Why are the majority of pseudo-PCCs unattested, what separates them from the attested PCCs?
The answer is that the attested PCCs form a natural class given certain assumptions.

First, let us add one more PCC to the list.
The *indiscriminate PCC* (I-PCC) forbids all combinations of DO and IO.
This variant is attested in Cairene Arabic.

$\downarrow$IO/DO$\rightarrow$ | 1 | 2 | 3
--: | :-: | :-: | :-:
1   | -   | N   | N
2   | N   | -   | N
3   | N   | N   | -

It arises whenever $x < y$ for all choices of $x$ and $y$.
The corresponding graph expands the U-PCC with an edge from $3$ to $1$.

\input_med{./pcc_ipcc.tikz}

Now we have 5 distinct graphs.
That is just a tiny fraction of all the possible graphs with three vertices.
However, we can already put the first restriction in place: all the PCC graphs are weakly connected.
So there are no persons that are completely unordered with respect to the other persons.
But there's still many more weakly connected graphs than just the five we have seen so far.

For example, the following graph is also weakly connected.

\input_med{./pcc_2pcc.tikz}

This would correspond to a PCC where IO must be 1, a *me second*-PCC (M2-PCC).

$\downarrow$IO/DO$\rightarrow$ | 1 | 2 | 3
--: | :-: | :-: | :-:
1   | -   | Y   | Y
2   | N   | -   | N
3   | N   | N   | -

Such a PCC-variant is still unattested.

Let's hold here for a moment.
If we include the M2-PCC in the collection of PCC graphs, we have already assembled a natural class.
Consider the class of weakly connected graphs with three vertices. 
We say that two of these graphs are *reachability equivalent* ($\equiv_R$) iff the reflexive, transitive closures of their respective edge relations are identical.

\begin{example}
The graph for the I-PCC is equivalent to the graph below.

\input_med{./pcc_uipcc.tikz}

This is the case because there are no two vertices $x$ and $y$ such that $x$ is reachable from $y$ in one graph but not the other.
\end{example}

Now let us layer another equivalence relation over the existing one.
Two graphs $G_1 \is \tuple{V, E_1}$ and $G_2 \is \tuple{V, E_2}$ are *structure equivalent* ($\equiv_S$) iff there is a total surjective function $f: V \rightarrow V$ such that $\tuple{V, \setof{\tuple{f(u), f(v)} \mid \tuple{u,v} \in E_1}} \equiv_R G_2$.

\begin{example}
Consider once more the S-PCC graph.

\input_med{./pcc_spcc.tikz}

It is structure equivalent to the graph below:

\input_med{./pcc_spcc2.tikz}

To show this we define a total surjective function $f$ with $f(1) = 3$, $f(2) = 2$, and $f(3) = 1$, yielding a graph that is reachability equivalent to the S-PCC graph:

\input_med{./pcc_spcc3.tikz}
\end{example}

When we look at the class of all weakly connected graphs with $V \is \setof{1,2,3}$ and put them into equivalence classes according to $\equiv_S$, there are only 6 equivalence classes.
And each one of these six equivalence classes contains one of the six PCC graphs we have seen so far --- I-PCC, U-PCC, S-PCC, W-PCC, M-PCC, M2-PCC. 

\input{./pcc_ipcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_upcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_spcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_wpcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_mpcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_2pcc.tikz}

What does this tell us?
The six PCC graphs we have identified are very natural from a mathematical perspective in that each one is an instance of one the six possible types of reachability relations in a 3-vertex graph.
But they are also special in that they require 1, 2, and 3 to appear in specific positions.
Permuting the positions of persons can easily produce a graph that does not correspond to any known PCC (see e.g. the second graph in the previous example).

The last and final step of our account, then, has to provide an explanation of why 1, 2, and 3 seem to be tied to specific positions in these graphs.

## Structure Preservation

Our discussion of PCCs started with the U-PCC, and we are returning to it once again.
Upon closer inspection of the six PCC-graphs, it becomes clear that every single one of them can be constructed from the U-PCC graph in a particular fashion.
Suppose we start out with the U-PCC graph and may add or remove edges as we see fit as long as the following condition holds for the graph $G$ constructed this way: if $y$ is reachable from $x$ in the U-PCC graph and $x$ is reachable from $y$ in $G$, then $y$ is reachable from $x$ in $G$.
In other words, we may reverse the direction of reachability only if we also preserve the original reachability relation.
Intuitively, this has a certain antisymmetric flavor to it: we cannot reverse edges, at best we can produce a cycle.

\begin{example}
The graph below cannot be produced from U-PCC in the prescribed fashion because it inverts the reachability relation between $1$ and $2$.

\input{./pcc_upcc2.tikz}

However, the minimally different graph below is fine.

\input{./pcc_upcc3.tikz}

It defines the same reachability relation as the I-PCC graph.
\end{example}

We now make this idea of constructing graphs from the U-PCC graph more precise.

\begin{definition}
Let $f_V: \wp(V \times V) \rightarrow \wp(V \times V)$ be a mapping from edges relations to edge relations over some fixed set $V$ of vertices.
Then $f_V$ is *weakly non-inverting* with respect to some edge relation $E$ iff $x E^* y$ and $y f(E)^* x$ jointly imply $x f(E)^* y$.
\end{definition}

With this definition we can look at the set of weakly connected graphs that may be obtained from the U-PCC graph by some function $f$ that is weakly non-inverting with respect to the U-PCC graph.
And what we see is that they are all reachability equivalent to one of the 6 PCC graphs.

We can make sense of this result as follows.
Many years ago, the linguist Arnold Zwicky posited a universal person hierarchy of $3 < 2 < 1$.
His claim was that every language respects this hierarchy to some extent, and that reflexes of this can be seen in the grammar.
But suppose that this hierarchy is just a base that languages are allowed to modify to a certain degree.
At the very least, one would expect that languages don't get to outright contradict the base hierarchy by positing, say, its mirror image $1 < 2 < 3$.
This kind of structure preservation is what is captured by the idea of a weakly non-inverting map between edge relations --- we are allowed to make changes to the hierarchy, but they must not be so egregious that they contradict the original order.
It is also reasonable to assume that hierarchies have to hang together, i.e. we cannot have an element that is completely unordered with respect to all other elements.
That wouldn't be much of a hierarchy, now would it?
This additional condition gives us the limitation to weakly connected graphs.
And thus we arrive at the 6 PCC graphs, or rather, a large set of graphs that are reachability equivalent to one of the 6 PCC graphs.
In combination with our abstract PCC $\text{IO} \not< \text{DO}$, this yields the attested PCCs (and one guy that will hopefully show up at some point).

This is pretty neat.
We have reduced an array of wildly different definitions to a bundle of intuitive ideas:

1. There is a general ban against indirect objects being less prominent than direct objects.
1. Prominence is determined by language-specific hierarchies for person.
1. Language-specific hierarchies must not deviate too much from the universal base hierarchy $3 < 2 < 1$.
1. The degree of deviation is captured by weakly non-inverting maps.

That said, four assumptions for 5 PCCs is not particularly economic.
Fortunately, the same idea can also be extended to several other phenomena.
So we might really be on to something here!
