# Paradigms in Morphosyntax

The graph-theoretic perspective can also explain an array of phenomena in *morphosyntax*, the domain of language where word structure interacts with sentence structure.
The phenomena all fall under the umbrella of the *$^*$ABA generalization*.
This is best explained with an example.

## $^*$ABA Explained

Adjectives usually come in three degrees:

1. a *positive* form, e.g. *good* or *hard*
1. a *comparative* form, e.g. *better* or *harder*
1. a *superlative* form, e.g. *best* or *hardest*

The contrast between *good* and *hard* already shows that these three forms are not always built the same way.
In *good*-*better*-*best*, the comparative and superlative look very similar, but they are both different from the positive.
This is an ABB pattern.
In *hard*-*harder*-*hardest*, all three forms are very similar.
That's an AAA pattern.

Additional patterns can be found in other languages.
The Latin counterpart to *good*-*better*-*best* is *bonus*-*melior*-*optimus*.
Here all three forms are distinct, which is why this is called an ABC pattern.

Curiously absent is anything like *good*-*better*-*goodest*, which would be an ABA pattern.
The curious absence of such ABA patterns is exactly what the $^*$ABA generalization is about.

The ban against ABA patterns can also be found in pronoun paradigms.
If we ignore number, English has a separate pronoun form for each person.
First person is *I*, second person is *you*, and third person is *he*/*she*/*it.
This is an ABC pattern.
But looking across languages, we also find languages with AAA, AAB, and ABB.
Only ABA is again curiously absent.

The absence of ABA patterns is an intriguing puzzle, and it can be solved in multiple ways.

## Monotonicity and $^*$ABA

In the previous unit, we learned that some linguists have argued for a person hierarchy of the form $3 < 2 < 1$, or equivalently $1 > 2 > 3$.
Adopting this hierarchy helped us in explaining the limited variation for the Person Case Constraint.
But it can also be used to explain why we find the patterns AAA, AAB, ABB, and ABC, but not ABA.

Recall that a function $f$ is *monotonic* iff $x \leq y$ entails $f(x) \leq f(y)$ for all $x$ and $y$ in the domain of $f$.
Now suppose that we map $1$ and $3$ to the same output form $A$, whereas $2$ is mapped to $B$.
No matter how we order the output forms, whether we posit $A \leq B$ or $B \leq A$, this mapping is not monotonic.
So no monotonic map can produce an ABA pattern for pronouns given the person hierarchy $3 < 2 < 1$.

The same argument holds for adjectives.
It is intuitively plausible to posit an ordering $\text{positive} < \text{comparative} < \text{superlative}$, which reflects their meaning --- *faster* is more than *fast*, but less than *fastest*.
Again no monotonic function can map this to ABA.

## A Graph-Theoretic Alternative

Recall that we restricted the class of PCC graphs to just 6 types (ignoring variants that define the same reachability relation).

\input{./pcc_ipcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_spcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_upcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_wpcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_mpcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_2pcc.tikz}

Now suppose that we allow two vertices $x$ and $y$ to be mapped to the same form A only if both $x$ is reachable from $y$ and $y$ is reachable from $x$.
In other words, we can only conflate parts of the graph that belong to the same cycle.
We can make this more precise via the notion of a strongly connected component.

\begin{definition}
Let $G \is \tuple{V, E}$ be a directed graph.
For any two $u, v \in V$, let $u \equiv_E v$ iff $\tuple{u,v} \in E^*$ and $\tuple{v,u} \in E^*$.
For every vertex $u$, we use $[u] \is \setof{ v \mid u \equiv_E v}$ to denote the equivalence class it belongs to.
Then $[V] \is \setof{[u] \mid u \in V}$ is the set of *strongly connected components* of $G$.
The *condensation* of $G$ is the graph $C(G) \is \tuple{[V], E_C}$ such that $[u] E_C [v]$ iff $[u] \neq [v]$ and $u E v$.
\end{definition}

(*Side note*: $C(G)$ is a DAG!)

\begin{example}
The M2-PCC graph contains a strongly connected component consisting of $2$ and $3$.

\input{./pcc_2pcc.tikz}

The other strongly connected component is just $1$ by itself.
Hence the condensation of the graph consists of two vertices.

\input{./pcc_2pcc_condensation.tikz}

In the S-PCC graph, it is $1$ and $2$ instead that form a strongly connected component, with $3$ remaining on its own.

\input{./pcc_spcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_spcc_condensation.tikz}

All the vertices of the I-PCC graph are reachable from each other, so they form a single strongly connected component.

\input{./pcc_ipcc.tikz}
\input{./pcc_ipcc_condensation.tikz}

In all the remaining PCC-graphs, no two nodes are mutually reachable, so the strongly connected components are just the nodes themselves.
Hence these graphs are identical to their condensations.
\end{example}

The idea that two forms can both be mapped to A only if they are part of the same cycle can now be stated in terms of strongly connected components:
a function $f$ maps vertices $u$ and $v$ of graph $G$ to the same element iff $u$ and $v$ are part of the same strongly connected component of $G$.
We can visualize this by looking at the condensation of a graph: if $u$ and $v$ are now part of the same node, they are also mapped to the same form $A$.
The conflation we see in the morphological paradigm corresponds to condensation of the graph.

Now consider the condensations of the 6 PCC-graphs:

1.  I-PCC condensation
    \input{./pcc_ipcc_condensation.tikz}
1.  S-PCC condensation
    \input{./pcc_spcc_condensation.tikz}
1.  M2-PCC condensation
    \input{./pcc_2pcc_condensation.tikz}
1.  U-PCC condensation
    \input{./pcc_upcc.tikz}
1.  W-PCC condensation
    \input{./pcc_wpcc.tikz}
1.  M-PCC condensation
    \input{./pcc_mpcc.tikz}

Now let's apply the principle we just staked out: if two forms are part of the same node, they have the same realization.
Then the graphs above correspond to the following morphological patterns:

1. AAA
1. AAB
1. ABB
1. ABC
1. ABC
1. ABC

This is exactly the range of attested patterns, with the unattested $^*$ABA missing.
So the same range of graphs that we carved out for the PCC is also at work in morphological paradigms.
Now that is an unexpected connection!

This is a nice example of why a mathematical perspective is so useful.
Yes, math is abstract and that makes it harder to grasp.
But the abstractness is exactly what allows us to connect phenomena that seem to have nothing to do with each other.
Abstractness is your friend --- an abrasive friend that often says cryptic things and can be quite a pain in the butt, but that's what real friends are like...
