## General Graph Properties

1. Draw a (directed) graph with 5 vertices that has as few edges as possible while being strongly connected.
1. Draw a (directed) graph with 5 vertices that has as few edges as possible while being connected but not strongly connected.
1. Draw a (directed) graph with 5 vertices that has as few edges as possible while being weakly connected but not connected.
1. Draw the smallest possible graph that is weakly connected but not connected.

## Prefix Trees

1.  Represent the following list of words as a prefix tree (assuming characters as the basic alphabet).
    1. nation
    1. nature
    1, national
    1. natural
    1. nationalize
    1. naturalize

1.  Represent the same list of words as a prefix tree but taking morphemes as the basic unit.
    For example, *natural* would only consist of the symbols *nature* and *-al*.

## DAGs

1.  Represent the character-based prefix tree from the exercise above as a DAG instead.
    Can you think of a word that cannot easily be added to this prefix DAG?

1.  Represent the morpheme-based prefix tree from the exercise above as a DAG instead.
    Can you think of a word that cannot easily be added to this prefix DAG?

1.  Below are two syntactic analyses for *John and Bill or Mary left the party in a hurry*.
    Draw the corresponding parse forest.

\input{./JohnBillMary1.forest}
\input{./JohnBillMary2.forest}

## FSAs

1.  Draw an FSA that recognizes the language $\String{a^* b^+}$, where $a^*$ denotes "0 or more $a$s" and $b^+$ is short for "1 or more $b$s".

1.  Draw an FSA that recognizes the language $\String{a^+ b^+ a^*}$.

1.  Construct the intersection automaton of the two automata above.

1.  The construction of the intersection automaton can be adapted to instead build an automaton that recognizes the union of two regular languages.
    Explain how.

1.  Describe in intuitive terms how given a right congruence relation $\equiv_L$ with finite index, one constructs an FSA that recognizes $L$.
