# Measuring Cardinality with Bijections

At this point we have encountered sets that are finite, like SL grammars, as well as sets that are infinite, e.g. $\mathbb{N}$.
But what exactly is the difference between the two, and do all sets fall into one of the two categories?
This unit covers how the cardinality of sets can be compared with *bijections*, and we will see that our intuitions about infinity can be very misleading.
For example, did you know that the set of natural numbers has the same cardinality as the set of even natural numbers?
But let's not get ahead of ourselves, one step at a time.

## Bijections

In previous units various properties of functions have been mentioned, though sometimes only in passing.
A function is *total* iff it is defined for every elements in its domain, otherwise it is *partial*.
The bag-of-words model and local grammars are examples of total functions.
In addition, a function $f: A \rightarrow B$ is *injective* iff for every $b \in B$ there is at most one $a \in A$ such that $f(a) = b$.
We briefly mentioned injective functions in the comparison of sets and tuples: requiring a tuple to contain every element at most once, like a set, is the same as forcing the tuple function to be injective.
Finally, we saw that a function $f: A \rightarrow B$ is *onto* iff $\range(f) = B$ --- every element in the co-domain is hit by the function.

An alternative term for *onto* is *surjective*, and this highlights that there is a connection between being injective and onto.
Whereas injectivity requires that for every $b \in B$ there is **at most one** $a \in A$ such that $f(a) = b$, surjectivity requires that there is **at least one** such $a$.
The two are flipsides of each other.
But they are not incompatibel: if for every $b \in B$ there is **exactly one** $a \in A$ such that $f(a) = b$, then $f$ is both injective and surjective.
In this case $f$ is called *one-to-one*, *bijective* or a *bijection* (in case you're wondering, there are no analogues nouns *injection* and *surjection*).

\begin{definition}
    A function is a *bijection* iff it is total, injective, and surjective.
\end{definition}

## Inverses

Since bijections are one-to-one mappings that relate exactly one input to exactly one output, and the other way round, they do not have a clear directionality.
Take some arbitrary total function $f: A \rightarrow B$, and now consider an alternative $g: B \rightarrow A$ such that $g(b) = a$ iff $f(a) = b$.
For arbitrary $f$, $g$ is not guaranteed to be a function.

\begin{example}
    Consider addition over natural numbers, which is $+: \mathbb{N}^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ with $\tuple{m,n} \mapsto m + n$.
    The counterpart would have to be a function $g: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}^2$ such that $q \mapsto \tuple{m,n}$ iff $q = m + n$.
    But for any natural number $q > 0$ there are multiple tuples $\tuple{m,n}$ whose sum is equal to $q$.
    Hence $g$ is not right-unique and thus cannot be a function.
\end{example}

Bijections, on the other hand, are functions even if they are used in the opposite direction.

\begin{example}
The *succesor function* $S$ maps every natural number to the number immediately after it.
So we have $S: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N} - \setof{0}$ and $n \mapsto n+1$.
Because $S$ is right-unique, it is a function, and it is total, injective, and surjective.
Therefore $S$ is a bijection.

Applying $S$ in the other direction, we get $g : \mathbb{N} - \setof{0} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ and $n \mapsto n-1$.
Again $g$ is right-unique and hence a function.
In addition, $g$ is total, injective, and surjective, just like $S$.
\end{example}

The reverse of a function $f$ is called its *inverse*, and rather than giving it a new name like $g$ it is customary to denote the inverse with $\inv{f}$.
Remember that $\inv{f}$ is not necessarily a function unless $f$ is injective.
For now we only define inverses for bijections, a full definition will follow once we encounter relations.

\begin{definition}
    The *inverse* of a bijection $f: A \rightarrow B$ is the unique $\inv{f}: B \rightarrow A$ such that $\inv{f}(f(a)) = a$.
\end{definition}

## Measuring Cardinality

The fact that bijections are one-to-one makes the useful tools to measure the cardinality of sets.
A function $f: A \rightarrow B$ is a bijection iff $A$ and $B$ have the same cardinality.

\begin{example}
Let $A \is \setof{1,2,3}$ and $B \is \setof{4,5,6}$.
Clearly $\card{A} = \card{B} = 3$, but one could also show that the two have the same cardinality by exhibiting a bijection from $A$ to $B$.
A simple choice would be $f(n) = n + 3$ with its domain restricted to $A$.
In this case, $1 \mapsto 4$, $2 \mapsto 5$, $3 \mapsto 6$.
But we could have just as well picked $g(n) = 7 - n$, or $h(n) = 2n + (3 - n)$.
All these functions are total, injective, and surjective, so $A$ and $B$ must have the same cardinality.

Contrast this with $A \is \setof{1,2,3}$ and $B \is \setof{4,5}$.
Suppose that there were a bijection $f$ from $A$ to $B$.
Then its inverse $\inv{f}$ would also be a bijection.
But it is easy to see that no mapping from $B$ to $A$ can be both surjective and right-unique --- at least one of $4$ and $5$ must be mapped to more than one value.
\end{example}

For finite sets, measuring cardinality with bijections isn't all that useful.
But the finite case shows that the logic is sound --- two finite sets have the same cardinality iff one can define a bijection between them.
The power of the bijection approach only becomes apparent once one considers infinite sets.

The cardinality of infinite sets cannot be determined by simply counting all there elements because, well, there are infinitely many of those.
And relying on intuitions is very dangerous once we deal with infinity.
Take the set of positive numbers, denoted $\mathbb{N}_+$ (do not confuse $\mathbb{N}_+$ with $\mathbb{N}^+$, which is the set of all non-empty strings of natural numbers).
Whereas $\mathbb{N}$ contains 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on, $\mathbb{N}_+$ contains 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on.
In other words, $\mathbb{N}_+$ is the same as $\mathbb{N} - \setof{0}$.
Hence $\mathbb{N}_+ \subsetneq \mathbb{N}$, which would suggest that the latter is larger than the former.
This also reflects our intuitions: if you take a set and remove something from it, the result should be smaller than what you started out with.
But our intuitions are attuned to reasoning in the real world, where we only have to deal with finite things.
With infinite sets, this intuition does not apply: $\card{\mathbb{N}_+} = \card{\mathbb{N}}$.

Why do those sets have the same cardinality?
Because we can establish a bijection between them.
In fact, we have already done so in the example above with the successor function $S$.
We can also depict the bijection in a tabular format:
$$
\begin{array}{lcccccc}
    \mathbb{N}   & 0 & 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & \ldots\\
    \mathbb{N}_+ & 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & \ldots\\
\end{array}
$$
Because there are infinitely many natural numbers, the fact that $\mathbb{N}_+$ is trailing behind by one doesn't matter, we can always continue matching the $n$-th number in $\mathbb{N}_+$ to the $(n+1)$-th number in $\mathbb{N}$.

## Measuring Natural Numbers, Integers, and Rationals

The example of $\mathbb{N}_+$ shows that removing a finite number of elements from $\mathbb{N}$ does not reduce the cardinality of the set, but in fact we can even remove an infinite number.
The set of even natural numbers is $\mathbb{N}_e \is \setof{0, 2, 4, 6, 8, \ldots} = \setof{ 2n \mid n \in \mathbb{N}}$.
Here the function $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}_e$ with $n \mapsto 2n$ establishes a bijection between the two sets, showing that they have the same cardinality.
Once again a tabular presentation makes this clearer:
$$
\begin{array}{lcccccc}
    \mathbb{N}   & 0 & 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & \ldots\\
    \mathbb{N}_e & 0 & 2 & 4 & 6 & 8 & \ldots\\
\end{array}
$$
We can continue this matching for as long as we want, we will never run out of numbers for the matching.
For every new natural number we can list a matching even number, and the other way round.

The cardinality does not change even if rather than removing an infinite number of elements we add an infinite number.
The set of *integers* is $\mathbb{Z} \is \setof{0, 1, -1, 2, -2, 3, -3 , \ldots } = \setof{n, -n \mid n \in \mathbb{N}}$.
Intuitively, one would think that $\mathbb{Z}$ is twice as large as $\mathbb{N}$.
For any finite cutoff-point $n$, this is true.
For example, $\setof{-10, -9, \ldots, 9, 10}$ has cardinality $21$, whereas $\setof{0, 1, \ldots, 10}$ only has cardinality $11$.
But once we consider the infinite sets, this discrepancy breaks down and once can again establish a bijection between the two, as in the table below:
$$
\begin{array}{lccccccccc}
    \mathbb{N} & 0 & 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 & \ldots\\
    \mathbb{Z} & 0 & 1 & -1 & 2 & -2 & 3 & -3 & \ldots\\
\end{array}
$$

The next larger set of numbers is $\mathbb{Q}$, the set of rational numbers.
This set consists of all numbers that can be written as fractions such as $\frac{5}{2}$ or $\frac{3}{3} = 1$.
Mathematically, we can define $\mathbb{Q} \is \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}$, where we interpret a tuple $\tuple{m,n}$ as denoting $\frac{m}{n}$.
For any finite set $S$, $\card{S \times S} = \card{S^2} = \card{S}^2$, a quadratic growth.
But for $\mathbb{N}$, the cross product does not increase the cardinality at all --- $\card{\mathbb{Q}} = \card{\mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}} = \card{\mathbb{Z}} \mult \card{\mathbb{Z}} = \card{\mathbb{N}} \mult \card{\mathbb{N}} = \card{\mathbb{N}}$.

The bijection from $\mathbb{N}$ to $\mathbb{Q}$ is slightly more complicated than the ones we have seen so far.
Since $\mathbb{Q} = \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}$, we can think of $\mathbb{Q}$ as a coordinate system where the first component of a tuple is the position along the $x$-axis and the second component is the position along the $y$-axis.
We can then draw a spiral that starts in $\tuple{0,0}$ and slowly spirals outwards towards infinity.
This gives us an *enumeration* of the rational numbers: the $n$-th position we encounter along the spiral corresponds to the $n$-th natural number.

\input_med{./rational_spiral.tikz}

Based on this diagram, we can once again exhibit the bijection in tabular form.
We only have to ignore all those points where one of the coordinates is $0$, since those are either illicit fractions or reduce to $0$ anyways.
$$
\begin{array}{lccccccccc}
    \mathbb{N} & 0 & 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 & \ldots\\
    \mathbb{Q} & 0 & \frac{1}{-1} & \frac{-1}{-1} & \frac{-1}{1} & \frac{1}{1} & \frac{2}{1} & \frac{2}{-1} & \ldots\\
\end{array}
$$
Some of those fractions are just different ways of writing the same number, for example $\frac{1}{1} = \frac{-1}{-1}$.
But we can simply ignore all positions with a negative $y$-coordinate.
That is equivalent to cutting off the bottom half of the spiral.
The enumeration then is as follows:
$$
\begin{array}{lccccccccc}
    \mathbb{N} & 0 & 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 & 6 & \ldots\\
    \mathbb{Q} & 0 & \frac{-1}{1} & \frac{1}{1} & \frac{2}{1} & \frac{-2}{1} & \frac{-2}{2} & \frac{-1}{2} & \ldots\\
\end{array}
$$
We can make things even more tighter by also ignoring points that occur a long a line that passes through $\tuple{0,0}$ and a point that's already part of the enumeration.
For example, there is no reason to include $\frac{2}{2}$ because it reduces to $\frac{1}{1}$, which is captured by the fact that a line through $\tuple{0,0}$ and $\tuple{1,1}$ also goes through $\tuple{2,2}$.
But we don't need to this kind of clean-up: the important point is that we can map all members of $\mathbb{Q}$ to $\mathbb{N}$.
Whether some members of $\mathbb{Q} = \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}$ are actually the same number is immaterial --- excluding them could only make our task easier by "shrinking" the size of $\mathbb{Q}$, so finding a bijection with all these redundant members is better than one without them.

That $\card{\mathbb{Q}} = \card{\mathbb{N}}$ is even more puzzling once we keep in mind that $\mathbb{Q}$ is *dense*: for any two $x,z \in \mathbb{Q}$, there is some $y \in \mathbb{Q}$ such that $x < y < z$.
For example, $\frac{1}{10}$ and $\frac{2}{10}$ have $\frac{3}{20}$ between them.
In fact, there are infinitely many numbers between any two rational numbers: between $\frac{1}{10}$ and $\frac{2}{10}$ there's $\frac{11}{100}$, between $\frac{1}{10}$ and $\frac{11}{100}$ there's $\frac{101}{1000}$, between $\frac{1}{10}$ and $\frac{101}{1000}$ there's $\frac{1001}{10000}$, and so on.
So even infinitely many infinities nested within each other are no larger than the set of natural numbers.


## Recursive Enumerability and Why it Matters

The cardinality of $\mathbb{N}$ is denoted by the special symbol $\aleph_0$, read "aleph null".
A set $A$ with cardinality $\aleph_0$ is called *recursively enumerable*, *countably infinite*, or simply *countable*.
The intuition is that the members of such a set can be enumerated in the tabular fashion we used above so that any given member of the set can be reached within a finite number of steps.
Suppose, for example, that we have a Python program that asks the user to pick a natural number.
Once the user has picked the number, the program starts counting from $0$ and does not halt until it has reached that number.
Without any limits on how long the program may run, it is clear that the program will eventually reach the chosen number.
The same works for integers and rationals because the program can enumerate the members of this set in a specific fashion so that it is guaranteed to encounter any given member after a finite amount of time.

The term $\aleph_0$ suggests that there is also an $\aleph_1$, and possibly an $\aleph_2$ or $\aleph_3$.
In other words, there are sets that are not recursively enumerable.
This is indeed the case.
The real numbers and the complex numbers both have cardinality $\aleph_1$.
So even though both the natural numbers and the real numbers are infinite, the reals are "more infinite" than the natural numbers.
And there is no such thing as a largest set.
For any $n \in \mathbb{N}$, one can construct a set with cardinality $\aleph_n$.
So there are infinitely many distinct sizes of infinity.

Constructing a set with cardinality $\aleph_n$ is actually fairly easy: given a set $S$ with cardinality $\aleph_m$, $\wp(S)$ has cardinality $m+1$, so in order to get an $\aleph_n$ set we an just start out with $\mathbb{N}$ and keep building powersets.
$$
    \card{\underbrace{\wp(\wp(\cdots(\wp(}_{n \text{ times}} \mathbb{N}) ) \cdots ) )} = \aleph_n
$$

Past $\aleph_0$, infinite sets get truly weird, and for the most part we will stay far away from any sets with cardinality $\aleph_1$ or even larger than that.
Not only does this keep things conceptually simple, it also keeps us in the realm of computability: a set can be fully computed by an algorithm iff it is recursively enumerable.
Larger sets can only be approximated, as current computers do for real numbers.
This has some interesting implications for computational linguistics.

The set of all strings over $\Sigma$ is $\Sigma^*$, and this set is recursively enumerable.
If we take a language to be simply a set of $\Sigma$-strings, then any subset of $\Sigma^*$ is a potential language.
So the set of all languages is $\wp(\Sigma^*)$, wherefore $\card{\wp(\Sigma^*)} = \aleph_1$.
This means that even if a learner had unlimited time and resources, they could not simply acquire the language of their environment by enumerating all possible languages and trying one after the other.
The space of potential languages is simply too large to be searched this way.
And remember that not being recursively enumerable pushes a set beyond the limits of what is computable.
Assuming that a learner must be carrying out some kind of computable algorithm, this immediately means that there are infinitely many languages that cannot be learned.
In fact, it is known that $\aleph_n - \aleph_m = \aleph_n$ for any $n > m$, which entails an even stronger result: at most $\aleph_0$ many languages can be learned, but there are $\aleph_1$ many languages, so $\aleph_1 - \aleph_0 = \aleph_1$ many languages can never be learned.
Nor is it possible to write a grammar formalism for specifying the shape of these languages.

Of course these claims hinge on a very general and unnatural definition of language, but they show just how special an object natural languages are.
The overwhelming majority of sets of strings are so weird that one cannot say anything interesting about them, and only a comparatively small subset of $\aleph_0$-many languages can be studied in a meaningful way.
