# Functions: Terminology and Notation

You are now familiar with the basic idea of functions as a mechanism that takes a certain number of inputs and maps each input configuration to a unique output.
But our way of talking about functions is still pretty clumsy, we need some specialized terminology and notation to communicate more precisely and efficiently.

## Other Names

Functions are also called *maps*, or *mappings*.
These terms are completely interchangeable, so we may call $f(x) = \frac{x}{2}$ a function, a map, or a mapping.
We also say that $f$ *maps* $x$ to $\frac{x}{2}$.

Functions are not the same thing as *relations*.
We will talk about relations at a later point, for now you can think of them as a more general version of functions that does not need to satisfy the right uniqueness property.
So all functions are relations, but not the other way round.

The customary term for the inputs of a function is *arguments*, while the output is also called the *value*.

\input_med{./function.tikz}

An $n$-ary function has exactly $n$ arguments.
A few special cases have dedicated terms:

- $n=1$: *unary*,
- $n=2$: *binary*,
- $n=3$: *ternary*

Addition, for instance, is defined as $\mathit{add}(x,y) = x + y$ and thus binary.
The successor function $S(x) = x + 1$, on the other hand, is unary.
The Pythagorean function from a previous unit is an example of a ternary function.

## Domains and Co-Domains

While functions are frequently specified with formulas like $f(x) = \frac{x}{2}$, this is somewhat imprecise.
Strictly speaking, a function is defined in terms of

1. a *domain*, which specifies what the inputs may look like, and
1. a *co-domain*, which specifies what the outputs may look like, and
1. a specification of how the inputs are mapped to outputs.

Sometimes domain and co-domain are obvious from context, but often they really need to be specified.
Take our example function $f(x) = \frac{x}{2}$.
If we take our domain and co-domain to both be the *real numbers* $\mathbb{R}$, then $f(3) = \frac{3}{2} = 1.5$ (the real numbers are very large and include $0$, $-173$, $5.321$, $-0.3215$, $\sqrt{2}$, and $\pi$).
But now suppose that the domain and co-domain of $f$ are limited to the natural numbers, which are $0$, $1$, $2$, $3$, and so on.
Then $f(3)$ cannot be $1.5$ because that is not a natural number. 
Instead, $f(3)$ is $1$, with a remainder of $1$.

```python
# define a real number division
def real_div(a,b):
    return a / b

# define natural number division with remainder
def nat_div(a,b):
    result = a // b
    remainder = a % b
    if remainder:
        return result, remainder
    else:
        return result

# show results for 3/2 with different domains
print("value for 3/2 over real numbers:", real_div(3,2))
print("value for 3/2 over natural numbers:", nat_div(3,2))
```

This example shows that just writing $f(x) = \frac{x}{2}$ is not enough.
A complete definition might look as follows:
"Let $f: \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ be a function from real numbers to real numbers such that $f(x) = \frac{x}{2}$."
Here we use a special notation of the form $\text{function name}: \text{domain} \rightarrow \text{co-domain}$.
The domain and co-domain do not need to use standard symbols like $\mathbb{R}$ as long as you make clear what the symbols you chose stand for.
So it is perfectly fine to write the following:
"We define a mapping $r: I \rightarrow S$ such that i) $I$ is the collection of all delicious ice cream flavors (vanilla, chocolate, oreo), and ii) $S$ is the corresponding set of milkshakes (vanilla+milk, chocolate+milk, oreo+milk), and iii) $r$ maps every ice cream flavor to the matching milkshake type."

Note that the domain/co-domain specification already includes the name of the function, so it is a bit redundant to write $f(x) = \frac{x}{2}$ later in the definition.
This is why some authors prefer to use a slightly different notation in this case: $x \mapsto \frac{x}{2}$.


## Partial and Total Functions

Let us look one more time at our example function $f$, with the natural numbers as domain and co-domain.
In other words, we are interested in $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ with $x \mapsto \frac{x}{2}$.
Earlier on, I claimed that for this function $f(3) = 1$.
But this is not necessarily true.
We can definitely stipulate that if $f(x)$ is not a value in the co-domain, we round down to closest value in the co-domain, but that is not what our current definition says.
With the standard understanding of how fractions work, $\frac{3}{2} = 1.5$, end of story.
Since $1.5$ is not a natural number, $f(3)$ is simply undefined.

A function that fails to produce an output for every value in the domain is *partial*.
For a linguistic example, consider plural marking.
We can regard it as a function from uninflected words to words with plural marking.
For example, $\mathit{tree} \mapsto \mathit{trees}$, $\mathit{goose} \mapsto \mathit{geese}$, and $\mathit{sheep} \mapsto \mathit{sheep}$.
The plural marking function also works for verbs, e.g. $\mathit{be} \mapsto \mathit{are}$ and $\mathit{run} \mapsto \mathit{run}$.
But plural marking only makes sense for words that have a singular/plural distinction in English, which excludes at least prepositions and adverbs.
So the plural marking function cannot return a value for *on* or *quickly*, it is undefined for these values.
Consequently, it is a partial function.

A function that is not partial is *total*.
Authors often do not make explicit whether they intend for a specific function to be partial or total.
This is particularly unfortunate because there are different standards across fields: Mathematicians take functions to be partial unless explicitly stated otherwise, whereas in computer science functions are total by default and partial functions are explicitly said not to be total.
While this is not a big issue in practice, it can cause serious problems.
For example, you might have done something with your partial function relying on theorem X, only to find out that X only holds for total functions.
Now all the work you did is on shaky grounds and might even turn out to be unsalvageable.


## Range of a Function

Another import concept is the *range* of a function, denoted by $\range(f)$.
This refers to the collection of all the outputs that the function can produce from the inputs in its domain.
For example, let $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ with $x \mapsto x+1$.
Then the domain and co-domain each consist of $0$, $1$, $2$, ..., but the range is $1$ ($= f(0)$), $2$ ($= f(1)$), $3$ ($= f(2)$), and so on.
In the special case where a function's range is identical to its co-domain, we call it *onto*.
The *identity function* $x \mapsto x$, for instance, is onto.
