# Sets with Counters: Multisets

## Generalizing Sets to Multisets

We have defined a set as a function with co-domain $\setof{\top, \bot}$.
The choice of the symbols $\top$ and $\bot$ is motivated by their use in formal logic to denote True and False.
True and False are also commonly represented by $1$ and $0$.
So we could have also defined sets as a function with co-domain $\setof{1, 0}$.
By pure analogy to the natural numbers, we might ask if there are also set-like functions that can also map objects to $2$, $17$, or $7,553,248,098$.
The answer is yes --- these generalized sets are called *multiset*, and instead of indicating only whether an object belongs to a collection, it keeps track of how many occurrences of that object are part of the object.

\begin{definition}
    A *multiset* is a function with co-domain $\mathbb{N}$.
    We indicate that a set $S$ is a multiset by subscripting it with $M$, as in $S_M$.
    For all $s$ in the domain of $S_M$, $S_M(s) = 0$ iff $s \notin S_M$.
\end{definition}

The definition above uses the fact that multisets are functions to denote the count of $s$ in $S_M$ by $S_M(s)$.

\begin{example}
    The multiset $\setof{a,a,b}_M$ contains two occurrences of $a$ and one occurrence of $b$.
    Hence $\setof{a,a,b}_M \neq \setof{a,b}_M$ even though $\setof{a,a,b} = \setof{a,b}$.
    However, it still holds that order does not matter: $\setof{a,a,b}_M = \setof{a,b,a}_M = \setof{b, a, a}_M$, just like $\setof{a,b} = \setof{b,a}$.
\end{example}

The notation for multisets is much less standardized than that for sets, and not everybody follows the convention of subscripting multisets with $M$.
If an author uses multisets, pay close attention to how they define their notation.
Also, it is often convenient to explicitly list the count of each element rather than listing the element multiple times.

\begin{example}
    The multiset $A_M \is \setof{a,a,a,b,b,c}$ can be more conveniently written as $A_M \is \setof{a: 3, b: 2, c: 1}$.
    Elements with a count of $0$ are usually omitted, but may be included if this is relevant information.
\end{example}

```python
from collections import Counter

def set_equals(A, B):
    print("{} = {}?".format(A,B), set(A) == (B))

def multiset_equals(A, B):
    print("{} = {}?".format(A,B), Counter(A) == Counter(B))

multiset_equals(["a", "a", "b", "b", "c"], ["a", "b", "c", "c", "d"])
set_equals(["a", "a", "b", "b", "c"], ["a", "b", "c", "c", "d"])
multiset_equals(["a", "a", "b", "b", "c"], ["a", "b", "c", "a", "b"])
```

With this kind of notation, it also becomes possible to define multisets with set-builder notation.
For example, $\setof{n: 2n \mid n \in \mathbb{N}}$ is the set that contains $2n$ occurrences of every natural number $n$: $\setof{0:0, 1:2, 2:4, 3:6, \ldots}$.

```python
multiset = Counter({n: 2*n for n in range(10)})
print(multiset)
```

Multisets can actually be defined in variety of ways.
Instead of letting any function with co-domain $\mathbb{N}$ be a multi-sets, some authors define a multiset as a pair $\tuple{S, c}$ where $S$ is a set and $c: S \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ is a counting function.
Yet another definition treats multisets as subsets of $S \times \mathbb{N}$ such that for all $a, b \in S$ it holds that $\pi_1(a) \neq \pi_1(b)$.
Under this definition, the multiset $\setof{a,a,b}_M$ would instead be written as $\setof{\tuple{a,2}, \tuple{b,1}}$, and $\setof{\tuple{a,2}, \tuple{a,1}}$ would not be a valid multiset.
But these are all just minor differences in notation, all of which express the same idea of multisets as mappings from objects to natural numbers that encode each element's count.

## Expanding Set Operations to Multisets

The sets operations union, intersection and relative complement can also be generalized to multisets.

\begin{definition}
    Given two natural numbers $m$ and $n$ with $m \leq n$, let $\max(m,n) = n$ and $\min(m,n) = m$.
    Then for any two multisets $A_M$ and $B_M$
    <ul>
        <li>the union $A_M \cup B_M$ maps every $a$ to $\max(A_M(a), B_M(a))$,</li>
        <li>the intersection $A_M \cap B_M$ maps every $a$ to $\min(A_M(a), B_M(a))$</li>
        <li>the relative complement $A_M - B_M$ maps every $a$ to $A_M(a) - B_M(a)$ (or $0$ if the value would be negative)</li>
    </ul>
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
    Let $A_M \is \setof{a:3, b:2, c:1}$ and $B_M \is \setof{a:1, b:1, c:2, d:1}$.
    Then
    <ul>
        <li>$A_M \cup B_M = B_M \cup A_M = \setof{a:3, b:2, c:2, d:1}$</li>
        <li>$A_M \cap B_M = B_M \cap A_M = \setof{a:1, b:1, c:1}$</li>
        <li>$A_M - B_M = \setof{a:2, b:1, c:0}$</li>
        <li>$B_M - A_M = \setof{c:1, d:1}$</li>
    </ul>
\end{example}

```python
A = Counter({"a": 3, "b": 2, "c": 1})
B = Counter({"a": 1, "b": 1, "c": 2, "d": 1})

def multiset_operator(A, B, function):
    keys = set(A.keys()).union(set(B.keys()))
    return Counter({key: function(A.get(key,0), B.get(key,0)) for key in keys})

def multiset_union(A, B):
    return multiset_operator(A, B, max)

def multiset_intersection(A, B):
    return multiset_operator(A, B, min)

print("Union of\n{} and\n{} is\n{}\n".format(A, B, multiset_union(A, B)))
print("Intersection of\n{} and\n{} is\n{}\n".format(A, B, multiset_intersection(A, B)))
print("Relative complement of\n{} and\n{} is\n{}\n".format(A, B, A-B))
print("Relative complement of\n{} and\n{} is\n{}\n".format(B, A, B-A))
```

The cardinality of a multiset with finitely many elements is the sum of all its counts.
As a formula, this looks as follows:

$$
    \card{S_M} \is \sum_{s \in S_M} S_M(s)
$$

This formula uses the symbol $\sum$ as an abbreviation for addition.
The subscript on $\sum$ tell us that $s$ should be substituted in all possible ways by elements of $S_M$.
For multiset $S_M \is \setof{s_1: c_1, s_2: c_2, \ldots , s_n: c_n}$ the formula expands to $S_M(s_1) + S_M(s_2) + \cdots + S_M(s_n)$, which in turn reduces to $c_1 + c_2 + \cdots + c_n$.

\begin{example}
    Consider once more the multisets $A_M \is \setof{a:3, b:2, c:1}$ and $B_M \is \setof{a:1, b:1, c:2, d:1}$, for which the following hold:
    $$
    \begin{align*}
        \card{A_M} &= \sum_{s \in A_M} A_M(s)\\
                   &= A_M(a) + A_M(b) + A_M(c)\\
                   &= 3 + 2 + 1\\
                   &= 6\\
        \card{B_M} &= \sum_{s \in B_M} B_M(s)\\
                   &= B_M(a) + B_M(b) + B_M(c) + B_M(d)\\
                   &= 1 + 1 + 2 + 1\\
                   &= 5\\
        \card{A_M \cup B_M} &= 8\\
        \card{A_M \cap B_M} &= 3\\
        \card{A_M - B_M} &= 3\\
        \card{B_M - A_M} &= 2\\
    \end{align*}
    $$
\end{example}

```python
def card(multiset):
    return sum(multiset.values())

print("|{}| = {}".format(A, card(A)))
print("|{}| = {}".format(B, card(B)))
print("Union of {} and {} is {}".format(A, B, multiset_union(A, B)))
print("Intersection of {} and {} is {}".format(A, B, multiset_intersection(A, B)))
print("Relative complement of {} and {} is {}".format(A, B, A-B))
```

Finally, the (proper) subset and superset relations can also be extended to multisets.

\begin{definition}
    Given two multisets $A_M$ and $B_M$, $A_M$ is a subset of $B_M$ ($A_M \subseteq B_M$) iff it holds for all $a \in A_M$ that $A_M(a) \leq B_M(a)$.
    The subset relation is proper ($A_M \subsetneq B_M$) iff $A_M(a) < B_M(a)$ for all $a \in A_M$.
    Superset and proper superset are defined in an analogous fashion.
\end{definition}

Note that this definition of subset entails that the powerset of a multiset can be much larger than that of a set.

\begin{example}
Returning once more to $A_M \is \setof{a:3, b:2, c:1}$ and $B_M \is \setof{a:1, b:1, c:2, d:1}$, we can see immediately that neither is a subset of the other.
First, $A_M \not\subseteq B_M$ because $A_M(a) = 3 \not\leq 1 = B_M(a)$.
In the other direction, $B_M \not\subseteq A_M$ because $B_M(d) = 1 \not\leq 0 = A_M(d)$.

The powerset of $B_M$ contains every multiset that is a subset of $B_M$.
These are
<ol>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:1, c:2, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:1, c:2, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:1, c:1, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:1, c:1, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:1, c:0, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:1, c:0, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:0, c:2, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:0, c:2, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:0, c:1, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:0, c:1, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:0, c:0, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:1, b:0, c:0, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:1, c:2, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:1, c:2, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:1, c:1, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:1, c:1, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:1, c:0, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:1, c:0, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:0, c:2, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:0, c:2, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:0, c:1, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:0, c:1, d:0}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:0, c:0, d:1}$</li>
    <li>$\setof{a:0, b:0, c:0, d:0}$</li>
</ol>
The powerset of $B \is \setof{a,b,c,d}$, on the other hand, has only $2^{\card{B}} = 2^4 = 16$ members.

The contrast is even more pronounced when we consider a multiset like $\setof{a:9}$.
While $\wp(\setof{a})$ only consists of $\emptyset$ and $\setof{a}$, $\wp(\setof{a:9})$ has $10$ members.
\end{example}

```python
def is_subset(A, B):
    for a in A.elements():
        if A[a] > A[b]:
            return False
    return True

def powerset(A):
    ps = [A]
    for key in A.keys():
        for val in range(A[key]):
            buffer = []
            for subset in ps:
                subset = subset.copy()
                subset[key] = val
                if subset not in buffer:
                    buffer.append(subset)
            ps += buffer
    return(ps)

from pprint import pprint

print("Powerset of {} is:".format(B))
pprint(powerset(B))

print()
print("Powerset of {} is:".format(A))
pprint(powerset(Counter(A)))
```

The cardinality of the powerset of a multiset is computed by adding 1 to each count and then multiplying all counts.
Again we can express this more precisely and succinctly with a formula:

$$
    \card{\wp(S_M)} \is \prod_{s \in S_M} \left ( S_M(s) + 1 \right )
$$

The operator $\prod$ behaves exactly like $\sum$, except that it is a shorthand for multiplication rather than addition.
So the formula above expands to $( S_M(s_1) + 1 ) \mult ( S_M(s_2) + 1 ) \mult \cdots \mult ( S_M(s_n) + 1 )$.

\begin{example}
We have already seen that $B_M \is \setof{a:1, b:1, c:2, d:1}$ has 24 subsets, so its powerset has cardinality 24.
Our formula yields exactly the same value.

$$
\begin{align*}
    \card{\wp(B_M)} &= \prod_{s \in B_M} \left ( B_M(s) + 1 \right )\\
                    &= ( B_M(a) + 1 ) \mult ( B_M(b) + 1 ) \mult ( B_M(c) + 1 ) \mult (B_M (d) + 1 )\\
                    &= ( 1 + 1 ) \mult ( 1 + 1 ) \mult ( 2 + 1 ) \mult ( 1 + 1 )\\
                    &= 2 \mult 2 \mult 3 \mult 2\\
                    &= 24\\
\end{align*}
$$
\end{example}

## Special Operations for Multisets

Since multisets are a generalization of sets, they allow for certain operations that would not make much sense with sets.
These are *multiset sum* ($\multisum$) and *scalar multiplication * ($\multimult$).

\begin{definition}
    Let $A_M$ and $B_M$ be two multisets and $n$ a natural number.
    Then
    <ul>
        <li>the multiset sum $A_M \multisum B_M$ maps every $a$ to $A_M(a) + B_M(a)$,</li>
        <li>the scalar multiplication $n \multimult A_M$ maps every $a$ to $n \mult A_M(a)$ (where $\mult$ denotes multiplication over natural numbers).</li>
    </ul>
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
    As in the previous examples, we will look at the multisets $A_M \is \setof{a:3, b:2, c:1}$ and $B_M \is \setof{a:1, b:1, c:2, d:1}$.
    For those two sets, $A_M \multisum B_M \is \setof{a:4, b:3, c:3, d:1}$, which is identical to $B_M \multisum A_M$.
    Furthermore, $3 \multimult A_M = \setof{a:9, b:6, c:3}$ whereas $3 \multimult B_M = \setof{a:3, b:3, c:6, d:3}$.
\end{example}

```python
def scalar_multiplication(A, n):
    return Counter({key: n * val for key, val in A.items()})

print("{} + {} = {}".format(A, B, A+B))
print("{} * {} = {}".format(3, A, scalar_multiplication(A, 3)))
print("{} * {} = {}".format(3, B, scalar_multiplication(B, 3)))
```

## Sets as Instances of Multisets

We said at the beginning that multisets are a generalization of sets.
If this is true, then sets should fall out as just a special case of multisets.
Let us see if this is true.

First, every set $S$ can be regarded as a multiset with co-domain $\mathbb{N}$ but range $\setof{0,1}$.
All the members of $S$ are mapped to $1$, everything else to $0$.
So far so good.
Now consider the set operations union, intersection, and relative complement.
For multisets $A_M$ and $B_M$, $A_M \cup B_M$ maps every $a$ to $\max(A_M(a), B_M(a))$.
For sets, the only two possible values for $A_M(a)$ and $B_M(a)$ are $0$ and $1$.
Let's consider each scenario in turn with union:

- $a \in A$, $a \in B$, so $a \in A \cup B$; then $A_M(a) = B_M(a) = 1$, and $\max(1,1) = 1$, whence $a \in A_M \cup B_M$.
- $a \in A$, $a \notin B$, so $a \in A \cup B$; then $A_M(a) = 1$, $B_M(a) = 0$, and $\max(1,0) = 1$, whence $a \in A_M \cup B_M$.
- $a \notin A$, $a \in B$, so $a \in A \cup B$; then $A_M(a) = 0$, $B_M(a) = 1$, and $\max(1,0) = 1$, whence $a \in A_M \cup B_M$.
- $a \notin A$, $a \notin b$, so $a \notin A \cup B$; then $A_M(a) = 0$, $B_M(a) = 0$, and $\max(0,0) = 0$, whence $a \notin A_M \cup B_M$.

Intersection and relative complement work in exactly the same fashion.

Even the formula for cardinality works as expected: given a set $A$, $\card{A}$ is the number of elements it contains, whereas $\card{A_M}$ is the sum of the counts of each element.
But since every $a \in A_M$ has a count of $1$, this sum is the same as $\card{A}$:
$$
\begin{align*}
    \card{A_M}  & = \sum_{a \in A_M} A_M(a)\\
                & = A_M(a_1) + \cdots + A_M(a_n)\\
                & = 1 + \cdots + 1\\
                & = \card{A}
\end{align*}
$$

We can even confirm why the cardinality of the powerset of some set $S$ must be $2^\card{S}$.
The formula for calculating the cardinality of the powerset of a multiset $S_M$ is $\prod_{s \in S_M} (S_M(s) + 1)$.
Every member of a set has a count of $1$, for a set $S$ this formula expands to $\prod_{s \in S} (1 + 1) = \prod_s{ \in S}$.
So if $S$ has $n$ members, the cardinality of $\wp(S)$ is
$$
\underbrace{2 \times \cdots \times 2}_{n \text{ times}}.
$$
But that is the same as $2^n$, which is the same as $2^\card{S}$.
It all fits together exactly as it should.

This shows that multisets are indeed a faithful generalization of sets.
And it also gives us yet another instance of how one and the same object can be viewed in multiple ways.
At this point, we have identified sets as special cases of functions, tuples, and multisets.

Alright, now that we have a shiny new toy, let's see what we can do with it.
