# Comparing and Modifying Sets

Being able to define sets is certainly useful, but for actual work it is much more important to be able to compare and modify them.

*Disclaimer:* This section is still work in progress and only contains the bare minimum.

## Subsets and supersets

\begin{definition}
    Let $A$ and $B$ be arbitrary sets.
    Then $A$ is a *subset* of $B$ ($A \subseteq B$) iff every member of $A$ is a member of $B$.
    In this case, $B$ is a *superset* of $A$ ($B \supseteq A$).
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
    A transitive verb is a verb that occurs with a subject and an object: *devour*, *contradict*, *wager*, *flummox*, and many more.
    Not all verbs are transitive, e.g. *sleep* or *give*. 
    Suppse $T$ is the set of all English transitive verbs, whereas $V$ is the set of all English verbs.
    Since every transitive verb is a verb, but no the other way round, we have $T \subseteq V$.
\end{example}

\begin{definition}
    For $A$ and $B$ arbitrary sets, $A$ is a *proper subset* of $B$ ($A \subsetneq B$) iff $A \subseteq B$ and there is a $b \in B$ such that $b \notin A$.
    Similarly, $B$ is a *proper superset* of $A$ ($B \supsetneq A$).
\end{definition}

\begin{example}
    Given our previous discussion, it is clear that the set $T$ of transitive verbs is proper subset of the set $V$ of verbs.
    Hence $T \subsetneq V$.
\end{example}

If there are two sets $A$ and $B$ such that neither $A \subseteq B$ nor $B \subseteq A$, then there can be only two scenarios.
One option is that $A$ and $B$ are *disjoint*, which means that there is no $x$ such that both $x \in A$ and $x \in B$ --- the two sets have absolutely no overlap.
Or $A$ and $B$ might be *incomparable*.
In this case the two sets have a limited overlap such that there is at least one $x$ with both $x \in A$ and $x \in B$, but there are also $a \in A$ and $b \in B$ such that $a \notin B$ and $b \notin A$.

\begin{example}
    The set of English prepositions (*on*, *to*, *at*, ...) and the set of English determiners (*a*, *the*, *this*, ...) have not a single word in common and thus are disjoint.
    The set of English verbs and the set of English nouns, on the other hand, are incomparable.
    Many words like *water*, *cut*, *fall*, *love*, *try*, *judge*, *beat*, or *cross* can be used as nouns or verbs, but many other words are used only as nouns (*tree*, *waterfall*, *idea*, *Ferrari*) or only as verbs (*write*, *convince*, *admonish*, *clean*).
\end{example}

Note that it is possible for both $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$ to be true --- in this case, $A = B$.
But there can be no $A$ and $B$ such that $A \subsetneq B$ and $B \subsetneq A$.

## The Powerset

Sometimes it is useful to take a set and consider all sets one could build from its elements.
For example, each one of the following sets can be built form the elements of $\setof{1,2,3}$: 

1. $\emptyset$
1. $\setof{1}$
1. $\setof{2}$
1. $\setof{3}$
1. $\setof{1,2}$
1. $\setof{1,3}$
1. $\setof{2,3}$
1. $\setof{1,2,3}$

Note that each one of the sets in this list is a subset of $\setof{1,2,3}$, and every subset of $\setof{1,2,3}$ is on this list.
So the above is the list of all subsets of $\setof{1,2,3}$.
The set of all these sets is called the *powerset* of $\setof{1,2,3}$.

\begin{definition}
    For $A$ a set, the *powerset* of $A$ is $\wp(A) \is \setof{ S \mid S \subseteq A }$.
\end{definition}

There are many alternative notations for the powerset.
A particularly common one is $2^A$ as it highlights two interesting aspects of the powerset.
First, we define the *cardinality* of a set $A$ as the number of elements it contains, and we denote it by $\card{A}$.
For example, $\card{\setof{1,2,3}} = 3$.
Now we can state a universal truth for the cardinality of powersets.

\begin{theorem}
    For every set $A$ with $\card{A} = n$, it holds that $\card{\wp(A)} = \card{2^A} = 2^\card{A} = 2^n$.
\end{theorem}

This is witnessed by our example set $\setof{1,2,3}$, the powerset of which has $8$ members (see the list above).
Feel free to compute the powerset of $\setof{1,2}$ and $\setof{1,2,3,4}$, you will see that they have $4$ and $16$ members, respectively.

But the $2^A$ notation for powersets has a deeper meaning that goes beyond mere numbers.
The notation $B^A$ is sometimes used to represent the set of all functions from $A$ to $B$.
And $2$ can be construed not just as the number $2$, but as any set with cardinality $2$, including $\setof{\top, \bot}$.
So $2^A$ can be taken to denote the set of all functions from $A$ to $\setof{\top, \bot}$.
But since functions are sets, this is exactly the class of all subsets of $A$.

In sum, the $2^A$ notation for powersets is very pleasing on a theoretical level.
But humans are a practical bunch, and since superscripts are slightly strenuous to read, $\wp(A)$ is the preferred notation for powersets.

## Union, Intersection, and Complement

\begin{definition}
    Let $A$ and $B$ be arbitrary sets.
    <ol>
    <li>The *union* of $A$ and $B$ is $A \cup B \is \setof{ x \mid x \in A \text{ or } x \in B}$.</li>
    <li>The *intersection* of $A$ and $B$ is $A \cap B \is \setof{ x \mid x \in A \text{ and } x \in B}$.</li>
    <li>The *relative complement* of $A$ and $B$ is $A - B \is \setof{ x \mid x \in A \text{ and } x \notin B}$.</li>
    <li>If $A$ is clear from context, we just write $\overline{B}$ for $A - B$ and call it the *complement* of $B$.</li>
    </ol>
\end{definition}

Note that order does not matter for union and intersection: $A \cup B = B \cup A$, and $A \cap B = B \cap A$.
But in general $A - B \neq B - A$.
