# Final Exam

1.  Below is a Gorn domain $D$ and the specification of a labeling function $\ell$.
    Draw the corresponding tree $T$.
    Then define $T$ as a directed graph instead.
    - $D = \setof{\emptystring, 0, 00, 000, 01, 010, 1, 10, 100, 1000, 11, 110, 1100}$,
    - $\ell(\emptystring) =$ S,
    - $\ell(0) =$ NP,
    - $\ell(00) =$ Det,
    - $\ell(01) =$ PN,
    - $\ell(000) =$ some,
    - $\ell(010) =$ Paul,
    - $\ell(1) =$ VP,
    - $\ell(10) =$ VP,
    - $\ell(11) =$ AdvP,
    - $\ell(100) =$ V,
    - $\ell(1000) =$ called,
    - $\ell(110) =$ Adv,
    - $\ell(1100) =$ today

1.  Let $\tuple{A, \leq_A}$ and $\tuple{B, \leq_B}$ be two partial orders.
    A function $f: A \rightarrow B$ is *monotonic* iff $x \leq_A y$ implies $f(x) \leq_B f(y)$.
    Monotonicity is surprisingly common in natural language.
    For each one of the following, explain why it can be regarded as a requirement that a certain mapping be monotonic:
    1. **The $^*$ABA generalization in morphology**  
       If the positive and superlative form of an adjective are identical, then the comparative form cannot be different ($^*$good-better-goodest).
    1. **The no-crossing branches constraint in phonology**  
       An autosegmental representation is a graph where elements are loosely attached to a skeleton, like balloons attached to a handrail.
       Sticking with this metaphor, the no-crossing branches constraint requires that the strings of the balloons may never cross.
    1. **The locality of operations in syntax**  
       Syntacticians distinguish three operations Select, A-move, and A$'$-move. Once an item has undergone A-movement, it can no longer be selected, and once it has undergone A$'$-movement, it can no longer undergo A-movement.

1.  A metric space is a set $M$ with a *distance metric* $d: S \times S \rightarrow [0,\infty]$ such that the following three axioms hold:
    1. identity of indiscernables: $d(x,y) = 0$ iff $x = y$,
    1. symmetry: $d(x,y) = d(y,x)$,
    1. triangle inequality: $d(x,z) \leq d(x,y) + d(y,z)$.  
    Now let $L$ be the set of English strings that do not contain any adjuncts.
    For every $s \in L$, we use $A(s)$ to denote its Adjunct Extension lattice.
    Explain why the union of all $A(s)$ can be regarded as a metric space.
    
1.  A TSL grammar can be defined as an SL grammar $G$ where all symbols that belong to a fixed set $S$ are deleted from the string before it is evaluated by $G$.
    For any given alphabet $\Sigma$ and integer $k$, $\mathbf{G} \is \tuple{\wp(A), \subseteq}$ is the lattice of all possible SL-$k$ grammars over $\Sigma$ (we ignore the edge markers $\LeftEdge$ and $\RightEdge$ here to keep the length of the exercise manageable). 
    In addition, $\mathbf{S} \is \tuple{\wp(\Sigma), \supseteq}$ is the lattice of possible tier alphabets.
    The lattice of TSL grammars is their cross-product $\mathbf{G} \times \mathbf{S} \is \tuple{\wp(A) \times \wp(S), \leq}$, where $\tuple{U,X} \leq \tuple{V, Y}$ iff $U \subseteq V$ and $X \supseteq Y$.
    Construct $\mathbf{G} \times \mathbf{S}$ for $\Sigma \is \setof{a,b}$ and $k = 2$.
    Are there any elements of $\mathbf{G} \times \mathbf{S}$ that are redundant in the sense that they define the same string language as some other element?

1.  Construct
    1. an automaton that recognizes $L_1 \is \setof{a,b,c}^* - \setof{ s \mid s \text{ contains at least 2 instances of } b }$,
    1. an automaton that recognizes $L_2 \is (xy)^*$, where $x \in \setof{a,b}$, $y \in \setof{b,c}$, and $x \neq y$,
    1. their intersection automaton.

1.  Draw an automaton that recognizes the language $L$ with $\Sigma \is \setof{a, b, c}$ such that every string contains either an odd number of $a$s or both an even number of $a$s and at least one $b$.
    Then use matrix multiplication to establish the following facts:
    - $\String{aaa} \in L$
    - $\String{aaab} \notin L$
    - $\String{aab} \in L$
    - $\String{caa} \notin L$

1.  Let $A$ be an arbitrary weighted automaton.
    Define a semiring for $A$ to compute for any given string $s$ the three (3) most likely runs of $A$ over $s$ (if there are less than 3 runs, the semiring should compute all runs).

1.  Even native speakers of English often have a hard time figuring out the structure of *the old man the boat*, where *man* is used as a transitive verb rather than a noun.
    Let $G$ be a PCFG with the following rules and probabilities:
    - $P(\text{S} \rightarrow \text{DP}\ \text{VP}) = 1$
    - $P(\text{DP} \rightarrow \text{Det}\ \text{NP}) = 1$
    - $P(\text{NP} \rightarrow \text{N}) = .6$
    - $P(\text{NP} \rightarrow \text{AP}\ \text{NP}) = .4$
    - $P(\text{AP} \rightarrow \text{A}) = 1$
    - $P(\text{VP} \rightarrow \text{V}) = .3$
    - $P(\text{VP} \rightarrow \text{V}\ \text{DP}) = .5$
    - $P(\text{VP} \rightarrow \text{V}\ \text{DP}\ \text{DP}) = .2$
    - $P(\text{Det} \rightarrow \text{the}) = .6$
    - $P(\text{Det} \rightarrow \text{a}) = .35$
    - $P(\text{Det} \rightarrow \text{an}) = .05$
    - $P(\text{N} \rightarrow \text{boat}) = .3$
    - $P(\text{N} \rightarrow \text{man}) = .5$
    - $P(\text{N} \rightarrow \text{men}) = .1$
    - $P(\text{N} \rightarrow \text{old}) = .1$
    - $P(\text{A} \rightarrow \text{old}) = 1$
    - $P(\text{V} \rightarrow \text{sleep}) = .5$
    - $P(\text{V} \rightarrow \text{man}) = .1$
    - $P(\text{V} \rightarrow \text{give}) = .4$  
    Compute the probabilities of *the old man the boat* and *the old men man the boat*.
    Also propose a method for computing the surprisal of seeing *the* after *man* in *the old man the boat*.

1.  The term *gapping* refers to constructions where the finite verb is omitted if it is identical to the previous one.
    Here are a few examples:
    1. John likes beans, and Mary potatoes.
    1. John gave a picture to his daughter, and Mary a gift to her girlfriend.
    1. John confessed his love to Mary, and Mary her loathing of John.  
    Explain in detail why these sentences are problematic for CCG and cannot be accounted for given the standard mechanisms (functional application, functional composition, type raising).
