# Types of Order Relations

As we just learned, relations can possess a variety of properties.
An *order relation* is one of a select few types of relations that display several of those properties at the same time.

## Overview of Order Relations

All standard order relations are transitive, and all are reflexive except the ones whose name contains the term *strict*; those are *irreflexive*.

**Order** | **Transitivity** | **Reflexivity** | **Symmmetry** | **Totality**
--:       | :--              | :--             | :--
pre-order | transitive       | reflexive       |
equivalence relation | transitive | reflexive | symmetric |
weak partial order | transitive | reflexive | antisymmetric |
strict partial order | transitive | irreflexive | asymmetric |
total order | transitive | reflexive | antisymmetric | total
strict total order | transitive | irreflexive | asymmetric | trichotomous

\input_mid{order_hierarchy.forest}

## Equivalence Relations

Equivalence relations are transitive, reflexive, and symmetric.
The prototypical example is $=$ over natural numbers, but this is also the least interesting example.
A slightly more interesting one is equivalence modulo $n$.
Two natural numbers $a$ and $b$ are equivalent modulo $n$ iff they have the same remainder when divided by $n$.
For example, $7$ and $13$ are equivalent modulo $3$ because both have a remainder of $1$ when divided by $3$.
In fact, we can even regard English as an equivalence relation $=_E$ over members of $\Sigma^*$ such that $a =_E b$ iff both $a$ and $b$ are both well-formed or both ill-formed (you are invited to verify that $=_E$ is transitive, reflexive, and symmetric).

Another well-known equivalence relation is $\equiv_L$, the *right congruence* relation with respect to some $L \subseteq \Sigma^*$.
For every string $a$, let $aL \is \setof{ u \mid a \tuplecat u \in L }$ be the set of *good continuations* of $a$ with respect to $L$.
Then $a \equiv_L b$ iff $aL = bL$.

\begin{example}
Suppose $L$ consists only of $\emptystring$, $ab$, $abab$, $ababab$, and so on.
Then $\emptystring L = abL = ababL = \setof{\emptystring, ab, abab, \ldots}$, whereas $aL = abaL = ababaL = \setof{b, bab, babab, \ldots}$.
Hence $\emptystring \equiv_L ab \equiv_L abab$ and $a \equiv_L aba \equiv_L ababa$, but $a \not\equiv_L ab$.
\end{example}

The right congruence relation is a very important one and forms the mathematical backbone of finite-state automata, which we will encounter at a later point.
It illustrates why equivalence relations are so important for computational applications: if multiple elements are equivalent in some respect, then it suffices to do all relevant computations with the simplest one of all the equivalent elements, saving lots of time and memory.
Even more abstractly, one can often do computations just with *equivalence classes*.

\begin{definition}
Let $\equiv$ be some equivalence relation over $A$.
Then for every $a \in A$, $[a] \is \setof{ b \mid a \equiv b}$ is the *equivalence class* of $a$.
Note that $[a] = [b]$ whenever $a \equiv b$.
The set $\setof{[a] \mid a \in A}$ is called a *partitioning* of $A$, and we say that $\equiv$ *partitions* $A$.
\end{definition}

It is often possible to lift operations from members of a set directly to partitions of that set, producing what is called a *quotient structure*.
Computing with quotient structures is often much more efficient.
We will hear more about this in later units.

## Partial and Total Orders

Partial orders form the natural counterpart to equivalence relations.
Whereas the latter are symmetric, partial orders are antisymmetric or asymmetric depending on whether they are reflexive or irreflexive.
Weak partial orders are transitive, reflexive, and antisymmetric, whereas strict partial orders are transitive, irreflexive, and asymmetric.

\begin{example}
Reflexive dominance is a weak partial order, whereas proper dominance is a strict partial order.
Left-sibling and precedence are also strict partial orders.

On the mathematical side, $\leq$ over natural numbers and $\subseteq$ over sets are weak partial orders, whereas $<$ and $\subsetneq$ are their strict counterparts.
\end{example}

Weak partial orders are very common in all of mathematics, and we will spend quite some time on them in the next few units.

When a weak partial order is total, it is called a total order.
A strict total order is a strict partial order that is trichotomous (remember that irreflexive relations can at most be trichotomous, but never total).

\begin{example}
Over natural numbers, $\leq$ is a total order and $<$ a strict total order.
The subset relation $\subseteq$ is not total, nor are reflexive dominance or proper dominance over trees.
However, string precedence is a strict total order.
\end{example}
