# Semilattices and the Adjunct Island Constraint

A long-standing distinction in linguistics is that between *arguments* and *adjuncts*.
An argument is a phrase that is introduced and required by some other word in the sentence.
For example, in *John devoured twelve pounds of pasta yesterday*, both *John* and *twelve pounds of pasta* are arguments of the verb *devour*.
Neither one can be easily removed --- neither *devoured twelve pounds of pasta yesterday* nor *John devoured yesterday* is a well-formed sentence of English.
So the arguments of the verb are a necessary part of the sentence.
In the same vein, we also can't freely throw in additional arguments: *John devoured Mary twelve pounds of paste yesterday the whole bowl* is not a good sentence of English.

Adjuncts, on the other hand, are much less tightly controlled than arguments.
They can be removed and added without problem.
The adverb *yesterday* in *John devoured twelve pounds of pasta yesterday* is an adjunct, and indeed it can be removed without reducing the well-formedess of the string.
We can also add additional adverbs, e.g. the adverb *quickly* or the adjective *delicious*.

1. John quickly devoured twelve pounds of pasta yesterday.
1. John devoured twelve pounds of delicious pasta yesterday.
1. John quickly devoured twelve pounds of delicious pasta yesterday.

Note that we can establish an order between the sentences above based on whether one can be obtained from the other by adding adjuncts.
Let us denote this relation by $\leq_A$.
Then

- *John devoured twelve pounds of pasta* $\leq_A$ *John (quickly) devoured twelve (delicious) pounds of pasta (yesterday)*,
- *John quickly devoured twelve pounds of pasta* $\leq_A$ *John quickly devoured twelve (delicious) pounds of pasta (yesterday)*,
- *John devoured twelve pounds of pasta yesterday* $\leq_A$ *John (quickly) devoured twelve (delicious) pounds of pasta yesterday*,
- and so on.

As we will see next, this relation is a weak partial order that interacts with well-formedness in particular way.
Understanding this interaction will allow us to explain some peculiar properties of adjuncts.

## The Adjunct Extension Semilattice

For the sake of simplicity, we will assume that sentences are strings rather than trees.
And rather than developing a linguistically informed theory of adjuncts, we will just assume that we are given some fixed $A \subseteq \Sigma^*$ of adjunct phrases.
Given a string $s \is s_1 \cdots s_n \in \Sigma*$ and $t \in \Sigma*$, it holds that $s \leq_A t$ iff there are $a_1, \ldots, a_{n+1} \in A^*$ such that $t = a_1 \tuplecat s_1 \tuplecat \cdots a_n \tuplecat s_n \tuplecat a_{n+1}$.
In other words, $s$ is a subsequence of $t$ and $t$ can be obtained by adding finitely many adjunct phrases from $A$ to $s$.

The definition of $\leq_A$ makes it clear that the relation is transitive.
Reflexivity holds because each $a_i$ may be $\emptystring$.
Finally, $\leq_A$ is antisymmetric because the only case where $s \leq_A t$ and $t \leq_A s$ is when $s = t$.
This holds because it is impossible for distinct strings to be subsequences of each other.
So $\leq_A$ is transitive, reflexive, and antisymmetric, which makes it a weak partial order.

Now let $A(s) \subseteq \Sigma^*$ be the set of all strings that can be contained from $s$ by adding finitely many elements of $A^*$.
In other words, $A(s)$ is the closure of $\setof{s}$ under unconstrained insertion of $A$-strings.
When $A(s)$ is ordered by $\leq_A$, it holds for any two strings $u, v \in A(s)$ that there is some $t \in A(s)$ such that $t \leq_A u$ and $t \leq_A v$.
In other words, any two randomly chosen strings of $A(s)$ have a greatest lower bound $u \wedge t$ with respect to $\leq_A$.
For example, the greatest lower bound of *John slept well yesterday* and *John really slept well* is *John really slept*.
And the greatest lower bound of *Really John really slept really* and *John slept really really* is *John slept really* --- note that we do not care at this point whether the strings are well-formed sentences of English, we are merely defining specific subsets of $\Sigma^*$ and ordering them with respect to some fixed set $A$.
At this point, we know that $A(s)$ is a partially ordered set where any two elements have a defined greatest lower bound, which means that $\tuple{A(s), \leq_A}$ is a meet semilattice.

One might also think that any two strings in $A(s)$ have a least upper bound, but this is in general not well-defined.
For *John slept well* and *John slept really well*, it would be easy to define the least upper bound as *John slept really well*.
But in many cases, there is no unique least upper bound.
For example, the least upper bound of *John slept yesterday* and *John slept indeed* could be chosen to be *John slept indeed yesterday* or *John slept yesterday indeed*.
In general, then, $\leq_A$ does not yield a unique least upper bound, so that $\tuple{A(s), \leq_A}$ is just a semilattice rather than a lattice.

From here on out, we will take $A(s)$ to refer both to the closure of $\setof{s}$ under insertion of $A$-strings and the semilattice structure induced by $\leq_A$ over $A(s)$.
We call this semilattice an *adjunct extension structure*, and we say that $u$ is an *adjunct extension* of $v$ iff $u \leq_A v$.

## Optionality and Well-Formedness Entailments

So far $A(s)$ has merely been a mathematical object, a fairly randomly chosen set of $\Sigma$-strings.
Now let us try to relate this to actual natural language or, more precisely, English.
We still assume that $A \subseteq \Sigma*$ is the set of well-formed adjunct phrases of English.
This includes single words like *yesterday*, *quickly*, *old*, and *alleged*, but also multi-word phrases like *without a doubt*, *in the nick of time*, and *while reading*.
The interesting thing is that once $A$ has been fixed, the well-formedness of elements in $A(s)$ informs the well-formedness of certain other elements in $A(s)$.

At the beginning of this section, we said that adjuncts are optional.
So removing an adjunct from a well-formed sentence does not make it ill-formed.
In the other direction, adding an adjunct cannot make an ill-formed sentence grammatical.
This means that well-formedness is partially predictable over $A(s)$.
Let $u$ be some random string in $A(s)$.
If $u$ is well-formed, then so is every $v$ with $v \leq_A u$.
If $u$ is ill-formed, then so is every $v$ with $u \leq_A v$.
In other words, well-formedness travels downward in $A(s)$, ill-formedness travels upward.

Another way of saying this is that well-formedness evaluation is *monotonic* over $A(s)$.

\begin{definition}
Let $\tuple{S, \leq_S}$ and $\tuple{T, \leq_T}$ be two partially ordered structures.
Then the function $f: S \rightarrow T$ is *monotonic* iff it holds for all $a,b \in S$ that $a \leq_S b$ implies $f(a) \leq_T f(b)$.
\end{definition}

In the case at hand, we can take the dual of the Boolean algebra $\mathbf{2}$ as our well-formedness lattice.
So well-formedness is encoded by the structure $\tuple{\setof{0,1}, \geq}$.
The function $f: A(s) \rightarrow \mathbf{2}$ is monotonic.
Pick some $u$ and $v$ with $u \leq_A v$.
If $u$ is ungrammatical, then so is $v$, hence we have $f(u) = f(v) = 0$, wherefore $f(u) \geq f(v)$.
If $v$ is grammatical, then so is $u$, hence we have $f(u) = f(v) = 1$, and once again $f(u) \geq f(v)$.
If, on the other hand, $u$ is grammatical, then $v$ may or may not be grammatical.
So we have $f(u) = 1$ and $f(v) = 0$ or $f(u) = 1$.
But either way $f(u) \geq f(v)$ still holds.
This shows that $f$ is indeed monotonic.

The fact that the well-formedness mapping for $A(s)$ is monotonic guarentees that we can mechanically calculate well-formedness for certain choices of $u$ and $v$ in $A(s)$.
And this is the key to solving a long-standing linguistic puzzle: the Adjunct Island Constraint.

## Explaining the Adjunct Island Constraint

Syntactician have known for a long time that adjuncts are more finicky than arguments in certain respects.
Arguments are usually fine with having parts of them moved to a different position in the sentence.

1. John invited the supervisor of this girl.
1. This girl, John invited the supervisor of.

But adjuncts do not seem to be happy with this arrangement.

1. John invited Mary without preparing the dinner.
1. $^*$The dinner, John invited Mary without preparing.

This is known as the *adjunct island constraint* because it seems that adjuncts want to form an island of their own, rather than having parts moved across the sentence.

Many solutions have been offered over the years, and the jury is still out on what exactly is going on.
We will not be able to completely solve the mystery, but we can offer an intriguing new perspective to the mix.

Remember that well-formedness is monotonic over adjunct extension structures.
So a sentence containing an adjunct can be well-formed only if the result of removing the adjunct is a well-formed sentence.
Let us try this with the ill-formed *the supervisor, John invited Mary without telling*.
This is an adjunct extension of *the dinner, John invited Mary* (we cannot treat *the dinner without preparing* as a discontinuous adjunct phrase because each adjunct must form a substring).
But *the dinner, John invited Mary* is not a well-formed sentence of English.
This necessarily entails that *the dinner, John invited Mary without preparing* is not well-formed either.
Hence the adjunct island constraint follows immediately from the monotonicity of well-formedness over adjunct extension structures, which is a consequence of adjuncts being optional.

As you can see, the adjunct island constraint is exactly what we expect to see given our initial assumptions about the properties of adjuncts.
But there is also another thing we expect to see: if removing the adjunct still yields a well-formed sentence, then the adjunct island constraint does not necessarily apply anymore.
It can, but it does not have to.
This is exactly what we find in English with so-called *parasitic gaps*.

1. This book, John reviewed without reading.

Here it seems like the phrase *this book* was originally both the object of the verb *review* and the gerund *reading* inside the adjunct.
Such parasitic gap constructions are allowed in English, but not in certain other languages like German.
This is pretty much what we expect in our system.
Removing the adjunct phrase *without reading* leaves the sentence *this book, John reviewed*, which is well-formed.
Since the well-formedness of $u$ does not tell us anything about the well-formedness of any adjunct extension $v$ of $u$, $v$ may be well-formed or not, it depends on the language at hand.

## A Final Note on Tree Structures

If you have already had some linguistic training, then you will object that the presentation above is a gross oversimplification.
Sentences are trees, not strings, and treating *the dinner, John invited Mary* as the basis for *the dinner, John invited Mary without preparing* goes completely against current linguistic thinking.
You are correct.
The material in this section was deliberately simplified to deal with strings instead of trees since the general idea surfaces more clearly without all the additional syntactic assumptions.
But the account works just as well in the more accurate and detailed setting.
Check out [the full paper](http://thomasgraf.net/graf13cls.html) for details.
