## Properties of Relations

1.  Many properties of relations are not mutually exclusive even though they may seem so.
    1. Give an example of a relation that is both antisymmetric and symmetric.
    1. Give an example of a relation that is both asymmetric and symmetric.

1.  Say whether the following statement is true or false, and justify your answer: if $R \subseteq D \times D$ is a symmetric and transitive relation, then $R$ is irreflexive iff $R = \emptyset$.

1.  For each one of the following relations, list all its relevant properties as we did in the table for tree relations.
    1. the proper suffix relation over $\Sigma^*$ (string $a$ is a proper suffix of string $b$)
    1. the subsequence relation over $\Sigma^*$ (string $a$ is a subsequence of string $b$)
    1. the synonymy relation over English words ($a$ is a synonym of $b$)
    1. the lexicographic ordering over English words ($a$ appears before $b$ in a dictionary)


## Orders

1.  Classify each one of the following relations as to whether it is an equivalence relation, a weak partial order, a strict partial order, a total order, a strict total order, or none of those.
    1. sibling relation in trees
    1. the married-to relation among humans
    1. the superior-of relation in a corporate hierarchy
    1. the suffix relation over $\Sigma^*$
    1. the ordering of English words by number of characters
    1. the shuffling relation $S$ such that $a S b$ iff string $a$ can be turned into $b$ by changing the order of symbols

## Lattices

1.  Draw the substring lattice for $abcd$.
    Then compute the following:
    1. $(abcd \wedge ab) \wedge bc$
    1. $a \vee (abc \wedge cd)$
    1. $a \wedge (a \vee b)$

1.  In the substring lattice for $abcd$, indicate which elements are mapped to $0$ by the grammar $\setof{bc}$.

## Adjunct Extension Structures

1.  While the notion of adjunct extension was developed for natural languages, it can just as well be applied to formal languages.
    Let $\Sigma = {a,b,c}$, and $A = \setof{a, bbb}$.
    Draw $A(bc)$.

1.  Suppose $\Sigma$ and $A$ are as before and that $L$ is some language with $abbcabbbc \in L$ and $abbcaabbbc \notin L$.
    For each one of the following strings, say whether it is a member of $L$, or not a member of $L$, or one cannot tell from the provided information.
    1. $bbcc$
    1. $aabbcaabbbc$
    1. $acc$
    1. $aabbcabbbc$
    1. $\emptystring$

1.  The notion of adjunct extension can be generalized to also subsume coordination.
    For instance, *John and Mary slept* would be a conjunct extension of *John slept* and *Mary slept*.
    Show that doing so explains the coordinate structure constraint, according to which a part of a conjunct cannot be put in a different position in the sentence.
    Here is an example of the relevant contrast.
    1. John drank this wine and Mary ate this steak.
    1. $^*$This steak John drank this wine and Mary ate. 

1.  Just like the Adjunct Island Constraint has an exception in the form of parasitic gaps, the Coordinate Structure Constraint has one in the form of so-called *Across the board movement*, where the same part is moved from both conjuncts.
    Again an example is more illustrative than the technical description:
    1. John bought this wine and Mary drank this wine.
    1. This wine John bought and Mary drank.
    Explain why it isn't surprising that Across the board movement can circumvent the Coordinate Structure Constraint.
